"Toa baya, ek wakhtuna ek l’awak asta."	"Then, baya, at one time, there was a fox."
" To ek phonduna pariman asta, se."	" Then, he was walking along a road, he."
 To parikwew tasa kakboy roitu del’-day.	" Then, as his was walking, he comes across a snow leopard."
 To kakboy roitu del’-day.	 He meets that snow leopard.
 Te du sal’a karin-day.	 These two are discussing.
 Se l’awak bhiiu-day.	 The fox is frightened.
 Se bi-bhiu-day ki-o:	" He is very frightened, because:"
" “Ia kakboy, ia gad’a."	" “This snow leopard, he is big, he will eat me,” he says to himself."
" “Ia may zhu,” ghõau-day."	" But the fox is clever, he says, “Brother, I and you are very good men."
" Se l’awak calak, se matraw-day? “Baya, a zhe tu bo prus’ moc, a zhe tu bayawt hik."	" I and you shall be brothers, we go along as brothers,” he says."
 To tasa phand del’ kakboyas.	" Then, he lies, to the snow leopard."
 Tasa kay matraw ki:	 The fox said to him:
" “Tu bo prus’ moc, a zhe tu baya."	" “You are a very good person, I and you are brothers."
"” To phonday parin-day, mashkul’ himan parin-day."	"” Then, they are walking along, they are talking, they are going."
" L’awak matraw, kakboyas kay:"	" The fox says, to the snow leopard “You should do like this:"
" “Tu sh?h? kari ki ek nawats awata pay wal’ ha, sharon hatya."	" go to a dangerous place, a high place, take hunting position, for the markhors."
"” “Shara in, shara on haw, shara gri undruak histi ogal’a tyay nashiu,” aghõaw."	"” “The markhors will come, when the markhors have arrived, you catch a markhor, throw it downhill, throw it down, it will die,” he said."
 Kakboy matraw:	 The snow leopard says:
" “A pe to aris haw, tu may hatya kia karis?” L’awak amaaw:"	" “If I do this, what will you do for me?” The fox said:"
 “A tay hatya tsa-tshatak krom karim.	 “I’ll do some small favours for you.
” “Tay hatya uk onim.	” “I’ll bring you water.
 Tay hatya shul’a onim.	 I’ll bring you firewood.
” To se matraw:	"” Then, the snow leopard says "
" “Prus’ dhõyo parik,” ghõaw."	"“OK, so we shall go."
" To pay hutal’a awata pay wajaw, kakboy."	"” Then, as they go along and come to a high place, he waits, the snow leopard."
" Se asta tara asaw, l’awak baya."	" He was also there, the baya-fox."
" To shara iu to gri histiu, undruak."	" Then a markhor comes, the snow leopard catches it and throws it downhill."
 Se histi aaw.	 He threw it.
 Ogal’a pay ga’ngay tyay shara nashiu.	" Going down, falling into the hole, the markhor dies."
 To l’awak maau:	 Then the fox says:
" “Onja bo chir hawaw, baya."	" “Now it has become very late, brother,” "
” “Al’bat copawew-o parik.	 “maybe we should go early tomorrow morning instead.
” “Prel’ikasa tara pay a zhe tu zhuk.	” “Going there in the morning I and you shall eat the markhor.
” “Prel’ik pashik.	"” “It will be day, and then we will see,” "
” Toa se apaw del’.	then he stayed.
" Toa tara uc’hars’is’ hiu, gona uc’har."	" Then there is the top end of a waterfall, it is a big waterfall."
" To tara d’ud’in, te."	" Then they go to sleep there, they."
 L’awak matraw:	" The fox says, "
" “Tu aya mo d’ud’I, aya d’ud’i,” ghõaw, kakboyas kay."	" “You shall not sleep here, sleep here instead, "
" Ia nawats, aya mo d’ud’i, aya d’ud’i,” ghõaw."	" he says, to the snow leopard “This is dangerous, don’t sleep here, sleep there,” he says."
 To kakboy matraw:	" Then the snow leopard says, "
" “Prus’ atra d’ud’im,” ghõi."	" “OK, I’ll sleep there."
 D’ud’in te.	" They go to sleep, they."
" L’awak-o aya d’ud’iu nawats ghenaw-day, nawats ghenaw-day."	 The fox sleeps there at the dangerous place.
 Pay rat hiu rat-o l’awak us’t’iu.	" It becomes night, at night the fox gets up."
 Us’t’i kakboyas kay maau:	" Getting up, he says to the snow leopard:"
" “May histis-day, baya,” ghõaw."	" “You are throwing me, baya,” he says."
" “Tichak buchum khezas,” ghõaw."	" “Move a little uphill,” he says."
 Se khabar ne tan pi kakboy-o.	" He is not aware of himself, the leopard."
 L’awak nawats ghenaw day us’t’i tharaw day se d’ud’iu tharaw day se d’ud’iu.	" Getting up from the dangerous side, the fox goes to sleep at the upper and safer side."
 Prasuikwew matraw ki:	" While they are asleep, the fox says:"
" “Buchum khezas,” ghõaw, kakboyas kay."	" “You shall move uphill,” he says, to the snow leopard."
" “Kakboy baya, buchum khezas,” ghõaw."	" “Snow leopard-baya, you shall move uphill,” he says."
 Kakboyas khial’ hiu:	" The snow leopard thought to himself, "
" “A tharaw day asam, buchum khezam,” ghõi citiu."	" “I am at the upper side, I move further uphill, he thought."
 To se buchum khezaw.	 Then he moves uphill.
 Se buchum khezikas wãuna undruak khezaw.	" But instead of moving to an uphill place, he moves downwards."
 Nawats ghen khezaw.	 He moves to the dangerous side.
 L’awak andyei usti aya d’ud’i aw.	" The fox gets up from here, and sleeps here."
 Toa l’awak tichak d’ud’iu.	 Then the fox sleeps a little bit.
 D’udi-o geri matraw:	" Sleeping, he says again, "
" “Puchum khezas, baya,” ghõaw."	" “You shall move uphill, baya,” he says."
" To se geri khezaw, se al’ay kay khezaw, nawatsghen kay."	" Then the snow leopard moves again, he moves to there, to the dangerous side."
 To tichak d’ud’iu l’awak.	" Then he sleeps a little, the fox."
 D’ud’i tichak asta kai-o geri matraw:	" Having slept a little, he says again:"
" “Al’ay khezas-l’a baya may nawatsuna al’i aas,” ghõaw."	" “As you have moved there, my dear baya, you have brought me to the dangerous place,” he says."
 Toa se kakboy aya zhal’iu nawatsuna.	 Then the snow leopard reaches here at the dangerous place. 
" To geri jagel’, jagai-o geri d’ud’iu."	" Then the fox looks again, having looked he sleeps again."
 D’ud’iu d’ud’iu tichak asta kai-o us’t’iu:	" He sleeps and he sleeps, for a little while, then he gets up saying:"
" “Tichak asta khezas l’a baya, tu may bo nawatsuna ala."	" “Move a little bit, dear baya, you brought me to a very dangerous place."
"” To tichak asta khezi, aya chur’ika zhal’iu, kakboy."	"” Then the snow leopard moves yet a little bit, he reaches the tip of the high place, the snow leopard."
 Toa ek gona bat oni aya thel’.	 Then the fox gets a big stone and places it here.
 Toa jagal’:	 Then he looks and says to himself:
" “Prus’ d’ud’iu, se kakboy."	" “He sleeps well, the snow leopard."
"” Ad’ud’aw pe haw-ta aya batuna khur s’at’aw, sh?h? kay zuk dyel’, kakboyas."	"” As the snow leopard was deep asleep, the fox here at the stone, he attaches his legs to the snow leopard and pushes, the leopard."
" Ogal’a pay ga’ngay tyel’-day, se kakboy."	" Going down, he falls into the hole, the leopard."
 Se kakboy pay ogal’a ga’ngay tyita.	" That snow leopard is going, being hit into the hole."
 To se l’awak koshan hiu.	 Then that fox becomes happy.
" “Kakboy baya parau,” ghõaw."	" “The snow leopard-baya went down,” he says, "
" “Cop-o tara pay jagem,” ghõaw."	" “tomorrow I will go there and look,” he says."
" Copawew pariu, tara."	" In the early morning he goes, there."
" Shara asta tara shiaw, kakboy asta nashi asaw."	" The markhor is also there, the snow leopard has died."
 Toa tara pay awdu kay prus zhu.	" Then, going there, he eats both of them."
 Se tan bihikas wajahen day kakboybayaa hatya cal’aki araw.	 Because of his own fear the fox tricked the snow leopard. 
" Badmashias thara to nashel’, gona kakboy."	" Because of that trouble he kills it, the big snow leopard."
 L’awak shamon cal’ak.	 The fox was such a cunning being.
" Toa kisa khul’ hawaw, baya."	" Then the story is finished, baya."
"Kaymina kaymina, bo suda sukuluna pariman asta, baya."	"Once upon a time many children were going to school, baya."
" Toa baba ek mocas putr ne asta, ek chu asta."	" Then, baba, a man had no sons, he had a daughter."
 Se asta sukuluna pariman asta.	 She was also going to school.
" Ek mocas put ne asta, tasa chu asta."	" A man did not have sons, he had a daughter."
 Se asta sukuluna pariman asta.	 She was also going to school.
" Bo t’em se tara sukuluna pariu-day, baya."	" She is in school for a long time, baya."
" Se tal’ey iw-day, dura."	 She comes home from there.
 Mis’t’er to khund’ial-day.	 The teacher calls at her.
" Saw suda prus’t’ kay khund’ial-day, se."	" He talks nicely to all the children, "
" Tasa kay matraw-day ki, se:"	" but he says to her, he:"
" “E kambakas chul’as!” “Anday ita sabak matras,” ghõaw-day, tasa kay."	" “Hey, daughter of misfortune! Come here quickly and study,” he says, to her."
" Toa se bo kapha hawaw, mis’t’eras pi."	 Then she became sad because of the teacher.
 Toa se dura paraw.	" Then she went home, "
 Dura pay dadas kay amatraw ki:	 having come home she said to her father:
" “Dada, suda prus’ kay khund’ial-day, mis’t’er, may kay matrawday ki kambakas chul’as."	" “Father, he talks nicely to all the children, the teacher, but to me he is saying “daughter of misfortune, "
"” “Tes tu anday ita sabak matras,” ghõaw-day."	" come here quickly and study, he says."
 Cop-o us’ti dadas paraw.	"” Getting up in the morning, her father went to the school."
" Sh?h? ki, baba, sukuluna hatya, sukuluna pay, baba, mis’t’eras som janjal araw."	" Like this, baba, to the school, going to the school, baba, he argues with the teacher."
 Janjal kay matrau:	" As they are arguing, he says, "
 “Tu prus’ kay saw suda prus’ kay khund’ies-day.	" “You talk nicely to all the children, "
" Tu kh?chãkan may chul’a kay, “kambak chulas anday ita sabak matras,” ghõas-day."	" but how come you are saying to my daughter “daughter of misfortune, come here and study?” ."
"” “Tay galat mondr, asa."	"” “Your words are wrong, they."
” Toa mis’t’er amatraw ki:	” Then the teacher said:
 “Tay chul’aw kambak.	 “Your daughter is misfortunate.
” “Kh? thi kambak may chu?.	” “How is my daughter misfortunate?” the father asked.
"” “Tay chul’aw cimbar shenas hatya nasib hiu, cimbar shenas hatya."	 “Your daughter will be the wife of an iron bed.
"” Paraw, tal’ey dras’ni."	"” He went away, the father, appeared from there."
" Achitaw, achitaw-ta, dras’ni paraw, phonduna paraw."	" He thought and he thought, going away from there, walking along the road (together with his daughter), "
" Dhenta shiaw, ghona dhenta."	" there is a mountain, a big mountain."
 Dhenta umri chul’as udrimana hawaw.	" As the mountain opens, the daughter steps inside."
 Dadas bian thaw hawaw.	 Her father is left behind outside.
 Dadas t’amt’aka thi thaw hawaw ki:	" Her father, now bereft of his daughter is left behind, saying:"
" “O, may chu, ia mis’ter jhoni asta."	" “Oh no, my daughter!, apparently that teacher was right."
” “May chu al’ay dhentay ataw.	” “My daughter has gone into that mountain there.
"” “A thaw hawis, maidanuna."	” “I have been left in the open field.
"” Toa, baba, se sh?h? thi asaw ki dadas pay asaw."	"” Then, baba, it was like this, her father has left."
" Chulas udriman dh?tauna ati jagay asaw-e, udriman dh?tauna cimbar shen shiaw."	" As the daughter had entered the inside in the mountain and looked around, inside in the mountain there is an iron bed."
" Tap tramas’ung, moc ne pashin ogoek."	" It is completely dark, people cannot see each other."
 Ek sha-to shen pashiw-day.	 Only that bed she sees.
" Toa, tara, cimber shenuna imiti mek shian."	" Then, there, the iron bed had nails all over."
 Toa achitaw achitaw-ta te mek upac’au.	 Then she thought and thought and took out the nails.
" Upac’hi khulel-day-e, gheri mek diun pay, puchum pariw-day."	" Having taking out nails for a very long time, and as she is finishing the job, then again, it was keeping giving nails, and she goes upwards."
" Tharaw day-o upac’iw-day, undruak pishtyak mek diman parin-day."	" As she finishes pulling nails out from the upper side of the bed, the nails were still coming up in the lower side."
" Ne abhaaw, se."	 She could not do the job.
 Toa shãshondyaka phrelik tara ati shiaw.	 Then suddenly a light entered there.
" Tara ati shiaw-e, toa istrizhaguak nisi bo wat-ta."	" As the light had entered, she realised a girl had been sitting there for a long time."
" Khialiti pay asaw, se chiti asaw."	" She fell into wonder, she thought."
" Toa ek istriza bata tara payda thi asaw, to-o du thi asan."	" As a woman had appeared there, they then became two."
" Du jhon thi to upaci asan, te mek."	" Being two persons, they pulled out, the nails."
 Upac’i aya s’is’una ghona mek shial’a.	" After pulling nails out for a long time, there was a large nail here at the head of the bed."
" Toa upac’i asan to upac’i asan-e us’ti nisi asaw, juan moc."	" Then they pulled it out, and as they pulled it out, a young man got up and sat right down."
" Se tasi hatya cimbar shen thi asaw, baba, sh?he ki, se moc asta."	" He has become an iron bed for them, baba, like this, but he was a man."
 Phato se pis’t’aw jaas zhe s’umber jaas som hamdardi kariu.	 Then he became sympathetic to the second wife and first wife.
" S’umber jaas mon ne day asaw, taa som."	" The first wife did not talk, with him."
 Bo kapha thi asaw.	 She became very sad.
" Pis’t’aw jaas koshamani kay asaw, taa som."	" The later wife had fun, with him, "
 Toa se bazaruna pay ki-o tasa hatya mar’ik gri oniw hul’a.	 so he would go to the market and bring beads for her.
" “May hatya may beru griw, a dukanuna ne parim."	" “My husband will buy things for me, I’m not going to the shop,” she said."
” Toa tasa hatya bo ishnyahari oniw hul’a.	 So he would bring many things for her.
" Se huk asta ne, “Tu may kay ko ne mond des-day."	 She was also not saying anything.
"” “Asa may kio ki onawaaw-day kio kia” “Tu asta may ja, asa asta may ja."	" “Why don’t you say something to me?,” the husband asked."
” Toa se matri asaw ki:	 “She (:the second wife) asks me to bring whatever for her.
 “A kia onawaam tay s’at’away.	"” “You are my wife as she is my wife,” the husband said."
” “May kia ajat ne hin-day.	 Then she (:the first wife) said:
” “Ek mar’ik may hatya oni.	" “What should I ask you to bring, I don’t need anything."
 “To kia mar’ik?.	” “Just bring me one bead.
"” “Ek kalamdar mar’ik may hatya oni,” ghõy asaw."	"” “What bead?,” her husband asked."
" To bazaruna pay to oni asaw-e, jaas sheh? kay muc’ dhari asau."	" “Bring me a magic bead,” she said."
 “Aya muc’a thai.	" After he went to the bazar and bought her that, his wife opens her hand and says “Put it here in my hand."
"” Asa to thay asaw-e, “Dupat’a ha-o, kalamdar mar’ik,” ghõy asaw."	"” As he puts it there, “break into two halves, precious bead,” she said."
" “Khias,” ghõy asaw, tasa kay."	" “Break,” she said, to the bead."
" Se kalamdar mar’ik asta chii shiaw, istriza asta nashi asaw."	" As the magic bead indeed broke, the woman died too."
" Kura may laway asini, baba, chutyakuna."	" Someone had lied this tale to me, baba, in my youth."
 A-o mimi kay aris.	 Now I passed it on to you.
 Ek hãsh may day asini.	 They gave me a horse.
" Se khut’a asta, ne."	" He was halt, right."
 A ne jagay to greda him.	 I took it without noticing it.
"Ah baya, a Sherwal’i pashika pay ays."	"Ah, you see, baya, I went to see Sherwali."
 Se may baya hiu.	 He is my cousin.
 May zhe tasa ayas babawtr.	 My and his mother are sisters.
 Tasa dura pay ays.	 I went to his house.
" Tasa dur ek bo shishoyak adrakuna shiu, bilkul tana awata."	" His house lies in a very beautiful forest area, in a completely separate place."
 Toa tara bas thi-o.	" Then, I was staying there."
 Toa a pishtyak Athens dai ita Thesaloniki hatya iman ays.	" Then, coming back via Athens, I was going to Thessaloniki."
 Thesaloniki hatya iman ays.	 I had a lot of things to do.
 May bo krom ashini.	 Then the weather had become very bad there on the island.
 Toa tara musim bo kharap thi ashis.	" There was much wind because, on the island there is much wind because of the ocean."
 Bo sirã’ diman ashis koki se ‘island’-una samandaraw wajahen bo sirã’ dyel.	" Then, on the the first day, as I thought that I would better go and buy that ferry ticket."
" To hawel adua a shase samandarani tiket’ gri im ghõi acitis-e, Kishti ne parik abhaaw bo sirã’as wajahen dai."	 The ship could not sail because of the strong wind.
 Copamin-o gheri ne parik abhaaw.	" In the morning time (the next morning), it still not could not sail."
 Waresh-o du tre bas pis’t’aw-o.	" Then the next day after, two to three days later."
" Toa copawewuna parikas t’em hawaw, hul’uk."	" Then, during the morning, it was time to leave, it was noon."
 Tre bajaano kishti samandari pulis amaan ki:	" At three o’clock, the sea police said, "
" “Ajo pariu,” ghõi."	 “Now it sails.” 
 Toa a pay t’iket’ agri.	 Then I went and bought a ticket.
 T’iket’ grii nisa nisi-o sirã’ dyiman ashis.	" Having bought the ticket, I sat down, as I sat down, the wind was still blowing."
 Tes sirã’ dyiman ashis.	 It was blowing fast.
 Toa a-o udriman ati kishtias udrimana bo moc nisi aini.	" Then I went inside, inside the ship a lot of people were sitting."
" T’v-‘see’-iman aini, kuro kariman aini."	" Some were watching TV, some where doing other things."
 A tara pay kursiuna nisi phato ad’ud’is.	" I went in there, sat down on a chair and then fell asleep."
" D’ud’i-o phato anga ne hawis pay, bo phond pis’t’aw, se kishti bo tsal’akiman ashis."	" Having fallen asleep, and then, not being awake and aware about the situation, a long way later, the ship was shaking a lot."
" Phato ad’ud’is, a acitis “asa shemi-o,” ghõi."	" Then, because I slept, I thought, “What is that!?” "
 Pay bo wat pis’taw-o a sangais moc alagul karin-day.	 A long time later I heard people were bustling about.
 Alagul aran toa a d’ud’i ays a ek tam anga thi jages-e.	" They were bustling about, then, I was sleeping, as I suddenly awoke and looked, "
 Moc saw pal’ay aan tal’ey nisikeynani thi.	 all people escaped from the sitting place there.
 Jages se kishti bilkul mus’an gherikas hiu-day.	 I looked and saw that the ship was about to turn over.
 Ek wã pel’at’ikas hiu-day.	 The ship was indeed about to turn over.
 Toa a asta adyais.	 Then I also ran away.
 Phato to bag gri adyay bian nia.	" Then catching the bag and running, I came out."
 Moc tal’ay tshatak kishtiuna nisiman aini.	 There people were sitting in small boats.
 Kiaki warek tshatak kisthti shian iphazatas bati.	" There were other small boats, lifeboats."
 Iphazatas bati tal’ay nisiman aini.	 They were siting there in order to be rescued.
 Adyay us’t’iman aini moc bo aboi diman aini.	" Running like crazy, they were getting up in the boats, people were calling ‘help’."
 Bo aboi diman aini bo perishan aini.	" They were crying ‘help’ a lot, they were very afraid."
" Toa phato adek wat pis’t’aw, phato sahi haw."	" Then, a little time later, then it became okay."
"Ek gad’a moc asta, gad’a moc sh?h? thi aaw, ki ek kut’uay asta, se."	"There was an old man, the old man he has become like this, in a shelter (he) was, he."
" Khay, tal’ay kut’uay-o, sh? thi aaw ki ek gagiik, tasa."	" Well, there in the shelter, it was like this, one cow there was, of his."
" To ek gagiik dhui zhu hul’a, taa balbac-o ne."	" He was feeding himself solely by milking that one cow, he had no family."
 Toa sh? thi aaw se gak chiay aaw.	" Then it happened like this, the cow stopped giving milk."
 Chiay aaw-e phato hayran thi aaw.	" As it had stopped giving milk, then he became worried."
" Hayran thi sh? thi aaw ki kura taa kia den, bo garip moc."	" Worried like this, because who will give him anything, he was a very poor man."
" Toa to gak mari aaw, se gad’a moc."	" Then he killed the cow, that old man."
 Gak mari sh? thi aaw ki to post-o suira dyay s’us’ay aaw.	" After killing the cow, it was like this, he dried the skin by putting it in the sun."
" Suira dyay s’us’ay-o, citi aaw citi aaw."	" Having let the skin dry by putting it in the sun, he thought and thought."
 To asta gri drazi pay aaw.	 He loaded the skin on the back and went off.
" Pay ek biabanuna pay aaw, tara moculak tara asan."	" Going, he came to a wilderness, there there is a crowd of people."
" Moc tara asan, to-o ne pashi aan."	" There are people there, they have not seen him."
" Se lash bewmut’a us’t’i aaw, se."	" Very, very slowly he climbed up in a willow tree, he."
" Tara-o us’t’i bewmut’a us’t’i, tara tasa hatya jayga shial’a."	" Having climbed up there, having climbed the willow tree, there was a place for him."
 To gaw asta ala us’t’aaw.	 He also took the dried cowhide up there.
" Us’t’i tara, phato dhrak day te moc jiay aaw."	" Having climbed up there, then, as he was lying down, he watched the people."
" Te tasi ulakan kia day aan, te."	" They gave their flocks of animals something to eat, they."
 Day sh? thi tan aw zhui aan.	" After giving the animals something to eat, they ate their own food."
 Aw-maw zhui-o te d’ud’i aan.	" After eating the food and stuff, they slept."
 Se-o tara mut’a isprapuna parau.	 He fell asleep there in the tree.
" Isprapuna pay, kimon ad’ud’aw kimon ne haw, anga ne hawaw, gad’a moc."	" Falling asleep, whatever much he might have slept, he did not wake up, the old man."
" Khur pastari aaw, gaw ataw, undruhak pal’i dariauna paw."	" He stretched his legs, the cowhide fell (down), falling down, it hit the river."
 Tara no’una daria ashis.	 There below there was a river.
" Dariauna tyay aheraw, moc anga ne hawaw, gad’a moc."	" As it hit the river, the river took it, the man did not wake up, the old man."
 Ko kay-o se anga thi aaw gaw pal’i shiu.	 After some time he woke up realising that the cowhide has fallen.
" To gaw asta ger ne kay aaw, se."	" He was not aware about that cowhide, he."
" Se gheri se jiay aaw, moc d’ud’i aan."	" Again he looked at the people, they are sleeping."
 Se asta gheri isprapuna pay aaw.	 He also went to sleep again.
" Se shatara d’ud’ikas mocuna gaw pal’i dariauna tyay shiu, s’ong-s’ongay tyay, awaza thi shiu, awaza thi shiu."	" Right there, in the middle of the sleeping, when the cowhide had fallen and hit the river, a sound appeared as the cowhide hit the branches."
" Asmanani thi ataw, ghõi, tal’ay te moc-o ugay dyay aan."	 Thinking that something fell down from the sky the people there went into the water.
" Pl’ik te asini, bishiani asta ziad moc, uk airaw."	" All, they are more than 20, there are a lot of people, the water took them."
 Airaw-e l’ush thi shiu.	" As the river took them, it became morning time."
 L’ushun-o jiay aaw-e ul’ak tara bhoni shian.	" In the morning, as the old man looked down, a herd of animals were fastened there."
 Perishan aan t’ung day.	" They are worried, bowing their heads down."
 Lash to gaw jiaw-e gaw ne shiu.	" Slowly, as he looked for that cowhide, the cowhide was not there."
" “Ah, gaw kura airan."	" “Oh, who took the cowhide?,” he asked himself."
"” Uchundi aaw, uchundi anday-al’ay tyay aaw."	" He climbed down, and after climbing down, he looked here and there."
 Uk hay shiu to gaw asta.	 The water has taken that cowhide.
" “Asmanani thi ataw, d’umb hawimi,” ghõi."	" He thought: “It fell from the sky, we are lost!” "
" Te asta uguna tyay, pal’i te asta d’umb, gaw asta d’umb."	" “They also jumped into the water, they were lost as the cowhide was lost."
 Lash uchundi tay ul’akan tada us’is’a pay aaw.	"” Climbing down very slowly, he went near to their herd of animals, up to the front part of the herd."
 Pragoa pay aaw.	 He went down to the rear part of the herd.
 Du gan’t’a tara nisaw.	 He was there for two hours.
 Nisaw-e mocan pata ne hawaw.	" As he sat there, there was no sight of anyone."
" Caw baja-o, ponj baja-o, chak praw, mocan pata ne."	" It became 4 o’clock, and even 5 o’clock, it became dark, no sight of anyone."
" Tasi tal’ay kharca ashini, tasi praw."	" There, there were things for the animals, he gave them things to eat."
" Te kharca-marca tasi day-o, te bic’haraw."	" After giving them those things to eat, he released them."
 Bic’hari saman-maman gardokan hatya pharaw.	" After releasing them, he loaded the things for the donkeys."
" Te rumbay ani-o, gad’a moc."	" Having gathered them in a line, he took them away, the old man."
" Tara asini gak tara gordok hãsh, sohorum ashini."	" There were cows, donkeys, horses there, there were gold."
" Te asta pharaaw, pharay paraw."	" He loaded that too, loaded and went away."
 Pay ek deh ashis.	" Going away, there was a valley."
 Tara dehuna paraw tasa kut’uas tada.	" He went there to the valley, near his shelter."
 Tara paraw-e moc bihan nihi jagaan.	" As he went there, people came out and looked."
" “Ey moc, shaa gad’a moc bo dewalat onaw."	" They said to each other? “Hey people, that old man brought a lot of riches."
” “Gaw pharay pay ays.	"” “Carrying the cowhide on his back, he left."
"” “El’i kawel’a alaw,” ghõi, tante mashkul hawan."	” “From where did he bring the valuable things?” – They discussed that for themselves.
 Se tara nii taa tara kut’uuna nii.	" He took it there, he took it there to his shelter."
" Te gos’t’ay praw, te saman athaaw."	" He put it in the stable, he put the things down."
" Thay gec araw, mocan pata ne."	" Having put it down, he waited and looked, no sight of anyone."
" Te taa som jare hawan, moc-o uk hay shiu."	" The valuable things were his in possession, because the water has taken the people."
" Toa moc, gromani moc, tara pay tasa aphucan ki:"	" Then the people, the village people, went there and asked him:"
" “Ey gad’a moc, tu emi kawei halya."	" “Hey old man, from where did you bring this."
” “Gaw pharay pay ay.	" Carrying a cowhide on your back, you went away."
"” “Ey moc, a to gaw taza kay pe abrinkis, bo dewalat onis dya."	"” “Hey people, if I would have sold that cowhide being alive then I would have brought much more wealth."
” “A to gaw brinki shemi hali aam.	"” “Selling that cowhide, I have brought this."
"” “Ne, ne, tu gaw brinki-ta shamon dewalat ne oni."	"” “No no, by selling a cowhide, you cannot bring so much wealth."
"” “Ne gaw brinki aam, wareg-o may kura den?” Paron tara dehuna pay amaan ki:"	"” “If I have not sold the cowhide, who else will give me (the wealth)?” They left, having gone there to the village, they said:"
 “Gad’a moc sh? sh? maaw-day.	 “The old man says this and this.
"” Te kõ’ aran, te, bishi bas hawaw, mastruk paraw, pata ne."	"” They listened, the other people in the village, 20 days passed, a month passed, nothing happened."
" Toa sh?h? sala aran ki, gromani moc:"	" Then they discussed the matter like this, the people of the village, that ."
 “Shase garip gad’a moc shamon mamila araw.	.“This poor and old man did so many things.
"” “Abi ei gak marik, homa emi gak."	"” “We will slaughter those cows, those cows of ours."
"” Pl’ik te gak niniay tara pay aaw, ghõi, shor hawan, te du shor hawan, amaran."	"” They all took the cows out, going over there, to a field, they became 100, they became 200, they slaughtered them."
 Mari mos abrinkan azhuan gaw-o s’us’aan.	" After slaughtering them, they sold and ate the meat, and they dried the cowhides."
" S’us’ay-o paron, ek mulkuna bazaruna hatya paron."	" After having dried the cowhides, they left, they went to a place, to the bazar."
 Bazaruna hay amaan ki:	" Taking the cowhides to the bazar, they said:"
" “Ey, gocu ne grea-day-e,” ghõi amaan-e."	" “Hey, you are not buying the cowhides?” they said."
" “Gocu ispa kia ajat,” ghõi amaan."	 “To what need are the cowhides for us?” they said.
" Post ne agrian, ne grii, akasan, akasaan pishtyak on."	" They did not buy the cowhides, not buying, (the village people) walked and walked with the cowhides and finally they came back."
 Pishtyak tara ita gad’a mocas hatya kahari hawan.	" Having come back, they got angry with the old man."
" Kahari thi, “Al’a junkik, homa taba arau,” ghõi."	" Being angry (they said): “We will burn him, he destroyed us."
" Sh? amaan-e: “Al’a junka,” ghõi, gad’a moc mutra kariu-day, bihan dras’naw."	"” As they said like this, “burn him,” the old man was going to urinate, he came out."
 Te tara kut’uuna angar s’at’aan.	 They set fire to the shelter there.
 Angar s’at’aan kut’u ad’uaw.	" They set on fire, the shelter burnt down."
" Se-o bhut muc’a kay tara cisti aaw, jiel-day, tara kay."	 The old man stood there with the pants in his hand and looks at the fire there.
" “Shel’i may hatya zid aran, dus’mani aran."	" “They have created problems for me, they have been hostile."
"” “A-ta khalash thi aam, may kut’u ajunkan."	” “I am safe but they burnt my shelter”.
"” “Khayr shiu, a isi pashem,” ghõi amaaw, tante."	" “No problem, I will show them,” he said, to himself."
" “Khodayas sargayro to kura pashin” paron, angar s’at’ay-o."	" “Who will see him except God?” they said to themselves, they went, after making fire."
" Aduaw, se kut’u, dui nisau s’ut’ik hawaw."	" It burnt down, that shelter, after being burnt down, it became ashes."
" L’uzhun-o us’t’I, “Ajunkimi, to gad’a moc, se homa taba kay ays."	" After waking up in the morning, they thought: “We burnt him, that old man, he had destroyed us."
"” L’uzhun-o us’t’on-e, gad’a moc bojeyuna s’ut’ik pirel-day."	"” As they woke up in the morning, the old man fills the ashes into a sack."
" “Ey, se-ta khalash thi aaw, kia mamila,” ghõi amaan-e, dunion dunion:"	" “Hey, he is safe, how come?,” as they said this, they thought for a long time:"
" “Asa jadu, asa kia ne hiu."	" “He is a magician, nothing can happen to him ."
"” “Asa hatya kia cal karik, homa taba araw."	"” “What plans shall we make against him, he destroyed us."
"” “Abi onja wec’hiru hawimi, balbac kibaw hawan, kawa pay gak griik?” "	"” “We have now become without milk, our family became like this, where shall we go and buy cows?” "
"Toa tara tan gromuna sala aran, sala kay amaan:"	"Then they made plans in there in their own village, having made plans they said:"
" “Asa hatya warek cal karik,” she amaan."	" “We shall do something else against him,” they said like this."
" “Kia cal?,” aghõan."	" “What plans?,” they asked."
 “Asa hatya ek cal shiu.	 “There is one plan for him.
” “Al’a atra pay nat’hek.	” “Going there we will chase him.
"” “Nat’hay gri al’a bhoni uk histik,” ghõi amaan."	” “After chasing and taking him we will tie him up and throw him into the water”.
 Tara pay nat’hay agrian to.	" Having gone there, they chased and caught him."
" Bo moc te, se-o gezhi."	" They were many, he was alone."
" Taa balbac asta ne, garip moc."	" He had no family, a poor man."
" Nat’hay gri to bakasay pron bakasay dyay, kulpi pron."	" Having chased and caught him, they put him in a box, put him in a box and locked it."
" Kulpi dyay to drazi airan, hay uk ahistin."	" After locking they took him away on their shoulders, taking him away they threw him into the water."
" Uk histi airaw, daria, to."	" Being thrown into the water, it took him, the river, him."
" Se-o “Abayo, ne ne” ghõi amaaw, sh? amaaw."	" He shouted out, “no no” he said, he said like this."
" Cisti kõ’ aran kõ’ kay pishtyak on, “Airau,” ghõi."	" They stood and listened, having listened, they came back thinking: “The river has taken him."
" Hay ek biabanuna hairau, biabanuna hay, mocas zhontruna zhal’aaw, hunduruna al’ay hairaw."	"” Being taken, the river took him to a wilderness, being taking to a wilderness, he arrived at a person’s watermill, being taken through the hundur."
" Hay zhontruna hatya hairaw, hairaw-e, tara-o bo dewalatman moc, maldar moc tara ays, du shor pay aini."	" Being taken, the river took him to a watermill, as he was taken, there was a very rich man there, he was a very rich man, he had 200 goats."
 Se-o “Tara kia hariu-day?” ghõi.	 He thought: “What is the water taking there?.
 Adyay tara pay badok l’asay to chal’aaw.	"” He ran, going there, he took his axe and pulled the box out from the water."
" Chal’ay to kulpi achinaw, chini jagaaw gad’a moc tal’ay aaw."	" Pulled out the box, cut the lock, having cut the lock, he looked, the old man was there."
" “Ey moc, tu may ko chal’ay,” ghõi amaaw ki:"	" “Hey man, why did you take me out?,” the old man said, "
" “May histi,” aghõaw."	" “throw me in again,” he said."
" “Atra bacahi may hatya zhal’aaw-day,” aghõaw."	" “To me a kingdom will arrive there,” the old man said."
 Sh?h? amaaw-e wal’moc amaaw ki:	" When he said this, the shepherd replied:"
" “May baza khul hawan, may histi, a bacahiuna nisim, atra mehtar griin-day."	" “My hands are finished, throw me and I will settle in the kingdom, there they are choosing a king."
"” “May hatya phayda shiu may histi,” ghõi amaaw."	"” “There will be a benefits for me, throw me into the water,” he said."
" Gad’a moc sustaaw, se moc juhan thi."	" The shepherd defeated the old man, the shepherd being young."
" “May sh? mal dewalat, tu nii,” “may histi,” aghõaw."	" “Take all of my valuable goods, throw me,” the shepherd said."
" Ne-o se sh? hawan, hawan-ta, wal’moc tal’ay ataw."	" Neither him nor the other they were like this, the shepherd entered into there into the box."
" Ataw-e gad’a moc kulpi dyay, j’anj’er s’at’ay, gon’d’ tal’ay dyay, drazi gad’a moc paraw."	" As the shepherd entered the box, the old man locked it, attached a chain, put a stick onto there, put him on his back and left."
" Hay to hay batthara hay, to uk ahistaw."	" Taking it, he took it and took it onto a stone and threw him into the water."
 Uk histi amaaw ki:	 Throwing him into the water he said:
" “Tu “ne” ghõi maas, atra tay phucin-day."	" “You will say no, there they will ask you."
"” Gad’a moc tara paraw, bazuri tsandays pay l’asaaw."	"” The old man went there, folded up his sleeves and released the goats."
" L’asay te pay gri paraw, tara pay."	" After releasing them, he left with the goats, went there."
" Te mal tara jaygauna zhal’aaw-e, gromani moc hayran hawan."	" As he reached there to his own place with the livestock, the village people became surprised."
" “Gad’a moc jadu, mal gri-aw, gheri dewalat onaw,” ghõi amaan-e."	" “The old man is a magician, he took the livestock, and in return he brought wealth,” as they said this."
" “Dikia cal karik,” bion, moc."	" “What shall we do now?,” they were afraid, the people."
 Gad’a moc tasi amaaw: 	 The old man said to them:
" “May sh? dewalat grea,” “May-o gheri uk hista, atra nii, a bacahiuna apaw dem."	" “Take this wealth of mine and throw me again into the water, being taken there, I will live in a kingdom ."
"” “A emi kia sektik ne bhaam,” ghõi amaaw-e, te bion."	"” “I cannot take care of this, the wealth,” as he said this, they became frightened."
" Bihi amaan ki “al’a kia ne pata hiu asa al’ei duniani asta iu,” ghõi amaan, sh?h? may."	" Being frightened they said: “We don’t know about him, he can even come from that world,” they said."
 Te moc amaan ki:	 The people said:
" “Ey, ek cal karik."	" “Hey, we will do a trick”."
"” “Asa bo dewalat onaw, asa el’i-ta aan-mi-oria”."	" “He brough much wealth, let that be with him."
" “Asa kia cal c’ic’hi aaw, aspab bihan chal’ay, ay maydanuna apaw dek, homa ama grom junkik."	"” “He has learnt some tricks, we will take all our things outside, we will live in a flat field, we will burn this our village down."
" “Asa s’ut’ik hay sohorum onaw, asa uk ahistimi, mal gri aw, gaw faray gak mari, dewalat onaw."	"” “He took ashes and brought gold, we threw him into the water and he came with livestock, carrying the cowhide after killing a cow, he brought riches."
"” “Ajo kia ne bata hiu, abi al’a cal kay abi bata jiek."	"” “Now, but there can be nothing, now we will try this trick too, then we will see."
"” Aspab chal’aan, chal’ay niay maydanuna histi, gromuna angar s’at’aan, te-mi."	"” They took out the things, taking them out and throwing it onto the field, they set fire to the village themselves."
 Angar s’at’ay grom ajunkan.	" Having set fire, they burnt down the village."
 Grom junki s’ut’ik pharaan bo moc hayran.	" After burning the village, they carried the ashes on their shoulders, a lot of people took it away."
 Hay bazaruna hay abrinkan-e amaan ki:	" Taking it, taking it to the bazar, as they sold it they said:"
 “S’ut’ik ne grea-day?.	 “You don’t buy the ashes?.
"” “Kia s’ut’ik”, aghõ."	” “What ashes?” the people in the bazar replied.
" “Somaniaw saruzo,” ghõi amaan-e."	 “Is this ashes from the somani-juniper?”.
" Sh?h? amaan-e, amaan ki:"	" As they said this, they said, “We made it from wood”, they said."
" “Shul’a gri kay a-am, shul’a gri kay aam,” ghõi amaan."	" “We don’t need wood-ashes,” they (:"
" “Shul’as’ut’ik-o homa kia adyat ne hiu” ghõi, ne agrian."	" the bazaar people) said, and they didn’t buy it."
 Ne agrian.	" The others also not buying and having come back, they (:"
" Ne gri, pishtyak ita, te gad’a mocas pi asta garip hawan."	 the villagers) became even poorer than the old man.
" Maydanuna thaw hawan, gad’a moc dewalatman."	" They were left on the bare field, the old man was rich."
" Gad’a moc aw, kas’ong asta niji aaw, wal’ pariu-day."	" The old man came, he has also taken off his hat, he goes herding."
" Hãshas thara nisiuday, gordok t’rat’rel-day."	" He sits on a horse, he releases the donkeys."
 Tasa kia l’ochiu zhe pociu-day.	 He has no worries.
" Dewalat tasa praw, khoday."	" He gave him riches, God."
 Te taa kia ne diman aini sh? thi aini aini.	" The other people in the village were not giving him anything, (because) they were like this."
 Tan wakht kibaw aran zaya aran.	 They wasted their time.
 A tara jaygauna ays to apashis.	" I was there in that place, I saw it."
 Ia kisa khatum hawaw.	 This story is finished.
Wakti may wakt ashis.	"Once upon a time, there was a time."
 May wawaa nom Khan.	 My grandfather’s name Khan.
 Khana (putras) nom Mirota.	 Khan’s son’s name Mirota.
" Mirotaa (putras) nom Sudrum Khan, Sayed Khan a-o, tasa putr."	" Mirota’s son’s name Sudrum Khan, I’m Sayed Khan, his son."
 Waktimaya homa ek wawa asta.	" Once upon a time, we had a grandfather."
" Zamana ashis, sak piliwe’ hul’a, basund ashis."	" There was a time, it became a very rainy season, it was Spring."
" Basund ashis-o, homa wawa ek istrizhaas hatya as’ek asta."	" It was Spring, our grandfather was in love with a woman."
" Deshuna ashis, aya deshuna."	" It was in the valley, here in this place."
" Anishuna zha Br?’a zha Darazguru zha, shal’ay homa shia desh."	" Until Anish, till Brun, till Darazguru, over there this is our valley."
" Khabar biko, basundmastruk, sak az’aiush."	" Suddenly, Spring month, apricot-kernels appearing."
" Sak piliwe’ hul’a, muchi-l’a, muchi sat bas pilewe’ hul’a."	" It was a very rainy season, it rained a lot, it rained for seven days, it was raining for seven days."
 Toa te istrizha Yas’i pay aan.	 Then the women had gone to do Yas’i.
" Kra’ka’ay day pay kanderisar tyay te asta gri pay, Batrika tyay Br?’a tyay Anizhuna tyay prehãk pay aan."	" Starting from Kraka, from Kanderisar, they took them along also, from Batrik, from Brun, from Anish, they went downstream."
" Paron haw, khay, waw-o shatasa pariawan ek istrizhagua’kas as’ek asta."	" When they went, then, grandfather, he was in love with one of the women who were going."
" Kabar biko, khay, “kawa basi aaw,” ghõi citi aaw."	" Then suddenly, so, he thought: “where can she have been?."
" Copamin-o jagay aaw-e, istrizha ne ita aaw, hic kura ne ita aan."	"” As he looked the next morning, the woman has not come, nobody at all has come."
" Weyrakas asta ne ita aaw, warek asta istrizha ne ita aan."	" His beloved has not come, also other women have not come."
" Taa som d’aluna pay aan, shate ne ita aan."	" Those who have gone together, none of them have come."
" Ne ita aan haw, prenaw Kanderisar pay, jagay aaw-e ne."	" As they have not come, as he went downstream to Kanderisar to find them, he could not find them."
" Khoji pay aaw, se, tre caw basan, ne-mi ita aan."	" Then he has gone searching for three-four days, still they had not come."
" Tal’ey Batrika pay aaw, tara ne, tara phuci aaw."	" From there, he went to Batrik, and they were not there either, he asked for them there."
" Br?’a paraw, tara ne, Anishuna paraw, tara ne."	" He went to Brun, they were not there, he went to Anish, they were not there."
" Darazguru paraw, tara ne."	" He went to Darazguru, they were not there."
" Phato wawaa sh? khial hawaw ki “Albat no’ay-day paron, a tharay ita aam."	" Then the grandfather thought like this that: “Perhaps they went the downway, I have come the upper-way."
"” Pishtyak aw, se Kra’ka’ pishtyak wehãk aw."	"” He came back, he came back upstream to Kraka."
" Ita aya ita jagaaw, ne pata."	" Having come back, having come here, he looked, he didn’t know of the women’s whereabouts."
" Phato se te isap aral’-e, sat istrizha pay aan."	" Then, as he counted them, he realised that seven women had gone."
 Hawel’ namber Ac’u’yak Awa.	 The first was Acuyak Awa.
" Gad’erak se tasi mocaw, istrizhon mocaw."	" She was the elder of them, of the women."
" Duo namber Nilikash?, Niliba’i, Sonba’i, D’ukbibi, Kacenduk."	" The second, Nilikash?, and then Nilibai, Sonbai, Dukbibi, Kacenduk."
" S’hel’i sat istrizha pay aan, nom asta sabit, shemi nom."	" These seven women had gone, also the names are proof, these names."
" Khabar biko, taa dustas tal’ay mocay, wawa pay aaw, phato."	" Suddenly, his girlfriend was among them, grandfather has gone, then."
 Tal’ey paraw pay.	" From there he went, going for a long time."
" Senjil’a pa’u, Senjila tyay E’h?’ paraw, E’h?’ tyay Biriunisara prehãk asta paraw."	" He reached Senjila, from Senjila, he went to Ayun, from Ayun, he also went down to Biriunisar, downstream."
" Phato wawaa pata ne hawaw, tasa."	" Then, about grandfather, we don’t know anymore, about him doing this."
" Se upul’i paraw, se cisti paraw, se kia thi paraw haw."	" Maybe he went flying, maybe he went standing, he may have gone in whatever way."
" Pay Tsiam azhal’aw, mishari zamana."	" Whatever way he went, he arrived in Tsiam, it was mixed world."
" Tsiam pay jagaaw-e, c’hetmocuna ghum shian."	" Having gone to Tsiam, and as he looked, there were wheat in the fields."
 Tara zamanauna ghum ne.	 In those days there were no wheat in the Kalasha community.
" Homa aya ghum shiw, tagar-o kawa ne, aya asta sujakbi."	" At our place now we have wheat, here is also small species of wheat."
" Tara pay jagay aaw-e, ghummocuna ek istrizha uk dyel-day."	" As he has gone there, he saw a woman irrigating the wheat."
" Toa deshay thi jagaaw, jagaaw tara pay."	" Then he looked from far away, he looked, went there."
" Tara hatya haybat praw, gromuna hatya parik ne abhaaw."	" He was afraid of going there, then he could not go to the village."
 Tara pay to uk achinaw.	 He went there and stopped the water.
 Uk chini-o mikinno’ay l’uhi aaw.	" Having stopped the water, he has hidden himself under the sage."
" Khabar biko, ogal’ay thi se istrizha khundi aaw, ogal’a gromuna kay."	" Then suddenly, the woman from down-valley called someone, in the down below-village."
 Grom tichak desha shial’a.	 The village was a little away.
" “Oh, Ac’uyak Awa, anday i, uk achis,” ghõi amaaw, tasa kay."	" “Oh, Acuyak Awa, come here, the water is closed,” she said to her."
" Se c’hetmocani istrizha, se-o tasa se dustas asta."	" The woman from the fields, she was his girlfriend."
 To uk chini-o se mikinno’ay l’uhi aaw.	" After stopping the water, he was hiding under the sage."
 Toa se gad’a istrizha tal’ey gromaw dras’niaw.	 Then the old woman came out there from the village.
 Ita tara ita to uk gheraaw.	" Having come, having come there, she turned the water back for the fields."
" Uk gheray ukas al’-ayhak tyay-o Paraw gheri, gromuna hatya."	" Having turned the water towards the field, then again she went back to village."
" Gromuna pay kia phat gan’d’a hawaw, shamondyaka hawaw, gheri to uk achinaw tara pay, se wawa."	" After she had gone to the village, after half an hour or so, he again stopped the water, having gone there, the grandfather."
" U’k achinal’-e se istrizha “kimon khundiem,” ghõi-o, phato ita aaw."	" As he stopped the water, then the woman thought “how many times shall I call,” then she came to turn the water herself."
" Ita tara ita to uk gherel, uk gheraaw."	" Having come there, she turns the water, she turned the water."
" Uk gheray tara c’hetruna hatya, parim ghõi cak hawal’-e, homa se wawa dras’naw mikinno’aw."	" Having turned the water, there to the field, having turned the water, when she was about to go to the field, our grandfather appeared from under the sage."
" “Ey, kaway paris-day, kawa ay, kh? thi a?”."	" “Hey, where are you going, where were you, how did you come?,” the grandfather asks."
" Anday jagaaw-e, dustas tara ita aaw."	" When she looked to here at him, her friend has come there, “Hey, how did you come, how did you come?,” she asked."
" “Ey kh? thi a, tu kh? thi a?."	" “The way you came – I also came like that,” he said."
"” “Tu kh? thi a, a asta sh?h? thi a,” ghõi amaaw."	" “Come here and stand close to me,” the man says, "
 “Anday cisti na.” 	" “I don’t have time now, I will not stand together with you,” the woman said."
" “May t’em ne onj-o, ne cistim a.” “May t’em asta ne tay tada onja cistikani, a onjes’t’a hawis,” se istrizha sh?h? amaaw."	" “I don’t have time to stand close to you now, I became onjeshta,” the woman said."
" “A tay tada khali mashkul him, kia may drazhi-o mo de."	" “I will only talk with you, but don’t touch me!."
” Khay duniauna shamon phond khulay wawa pay aaw .	"” Khay! The grandfather has walked so many roads in all the world to find her, and then she won’t have contact with him."
" “Dikia mon, kia mon praw,” ghõi."	" “What are these words, what is said by her,” he thinks."
" Taa gehen kay paraw, paraw."	 Then he approached her.
" “Tu mo mo may mo cut’i,” ghõi amaaw."	" “No, no, no, don’t you touch me,” she said."
" “Mo cut’i,” ghõi amaaw haw, “Ey, ko sh? maaw-day?,” ghõi."	" When she said “don’t touch me,” “Hey, is why she talking like this?,” he said to himself, "
" “Tu akher t’okmat kay may cut’im,” ghõas-day."	" “You insist touching me anyhow,” she said."
” “Tu cut’i-ta mo may drazhi mo.	" “Don’t touch me, and don’t even try to approach me,” she says."
"” “Tu tay al’a chutyak a’nguyak may shaya kibawuna zhal’ay,” ghõi amaaw."	" “You can let that small finger of yours touch my cloth or anything,” she said."
 “A pe ne l’awem-day haw.	" “If I am not lying,” she said."
"” Sh?h? kay chutyak a’nguyak tara bazuyruna zhal’aaw e, cew bazuyruna zhal’aaw-e, s’us’i shanday azhal’aw-aw."	" Like this, as he lets the little finger touch the sleeves, as he lets the little finger touch the sleeves of the clothes, the finger dried here as it touched her cloth."
 As’us’aw toa sh?h? kay tasa-mi ek l’ok ahistaw.	" It dried, then like this he threw the finger as if it was an old rag."
 Se istrizha kawa kibawuna gren’ dyay ays haw.	 The woman had a piece of cloth tied to her somewhere.
" Ahistaw, toa gri abhonaw tyay to a’nguyak bhoni."	" She threw it, then he took it and fastened his finger with the piece of cloth."
" Sh? kay tasa kay ahistaw, "	" She threw like this, and said:"
" “Thedi may mo cut’i, ajo hawaw ne may pi tasali hawaw tay."	" “Now, don’t touch me, so now, do you trust me?."
” “A onjes’t’a thi aam a sucaun para.	"” “I have become onjes’t’a, I have been purified."
"” “May tu mo cut’i,” ghõi may ays."	” “I told you not to touch me.
" “Tu may acut’i, tu onj-o pishtyak pari."	"” “You touched me, you go back now."
"” “Pishtyak pari,” aghõaw haw, wawa acitaw acitaw s’is’ kucays."	"” “When she said ‘go back,” grandfather thought and thought, scratched his head."
 S’is’ kucay-o amaaw ki:	" Scratching his head, he said, “OK, I am going."
" “Dõyõ parim-day-e, tu aya cisti-na,” ghõi amaaw."	"” “You stay here for a while,” she said."
" “Ek ponj milet’ cisti adhek wat cisti,” ghõi amaaw."	" “Stay for 5 minutes time, stay a little while,” she said."
" “Adhek wat cisti,” ghummocuna pay, mocuna pay jagaaw-e, mocuna awatay-ta kibaw shian haril’ak shian."	" “Stay a little while” she said, as she went into the middle of the wheat fields, into the centre and looked, and in the centre, around there was something, it was green."
" Mocuna se ghora thi ita shian, te ghuum."	" In the centre the wheat has become white, it had ripened, the wheat."
 Chini chini chini chini bat’i kay-o.	 Cutting and cutting and cutting she cut a lot of wheat and made a bundle of it.
 Shamondyaka bat’i kay cu’isut gri cu’i chini tyay bhoni.	" Made a small bundle of wheat, took a braid-string and cut it, and fastened it tightly the bundle of wheat."
" Ghren’ dyay-o tara ita, tara zhaygon’d’a ita wawaa kay ahistaw."	" Having tied it, she came there, having come there to the irrigation channel, she threw it (:the bundle) to grandfather."
" “Shemi hay tan hatya, bi kari,” aghõal’-aw."	" “Take this and grow it for yourself, grow it,” she said."
" Phato sida ao, ita se bas hawaw."	" Then he came back to the Kalasha valley straight away, he came and stayed."
" Gheri se, khay mishari moc, hawaay ao."	" Again, being a mixed person, he came by air through the air."
 Hawaay ita dubajay zhal’i-o.	" He came by air, arrived there somewhere, at Dubaj, came to Kraka by walking."
 Kasi ita Kra’Ka’ ao.	 He came to Kraka by walking.
 Kra’ka’ ita to ghum s’us’ ay-o phato bi araw.	" Coming to Kraka, he dried the wheat and then cultivated it."
" Bi kay, ek-du mand hawaw, se ghum."	" Having cultivated it, it became One - Two mand, the wheat, "
 Du mand hik zhe khabardar hawaw.	 Two mand became (of the wheat) and the people of the valley came to know about this.
 Deshuna haw kawa asta moc khabar hawaw ki tasa khon’d’aghum payda thi shiu.	 When in the valley and everywhere the people came to know that ‘hairless wheat’ has come into being.
" Phato kas-o, ek ser praw, kas-o bat’i praw kas-o du paw praw."	" Then he gave one ser to someone, gave a bundle of wheat to another one, and two paw to another."
" Sh? kay to aphazhaw, tasa-mi hatya thaway-o."	 He distributed like this and he left something for himself.
 Shasa ghum homa shatasa wawaa nis’an.	 That wheat is a sign of that grandfather of ours.
" Sal’a ghum homa-day aaw, day aal’aw."	 He has given us that wheat.
" Shato ghum phato jari haw, se mulkuna jari hawal’-aw."	" That wheat, then, was eaten, eaten in the country."
 Sha-to mashkulgi.	 And that is the way it is.
"Ek l’awak ek shara zhe ek ka’ga’ malgiri asta, yardustan asta."	One fox and one markhor and one crow were friends.
 Ek awata pay te tromish-o d’ud’in hul’a.	 Having gone to a place they slept at night.
" Ek dhenta tara dhentak?’una pay, d’ud’in hul’a har tromish."	" There was a mountain there, they went sleeping in a mountain cave every evening."
 Se shara-o dish bad’ul’a thi asta.	 The markhor was very fat.
 Toa se l’awak tan zhanuna amaaw hul’a:	 Then the fox in his innermost heart said:
" “Shama shara pe nashay-o pe, kawa idrõ’ may den kawa a zum dya,” ghõi."	" “If that markhor was killed, and the intestines were given to me, I will eat them,” he said."
" Bo afsus kariu-day, l’awak."	" He is very eager, the fox, in a false manner."
 Ita tromizh-o ek awata basin hul’a.	 They then came in the evening to spend the night in one other place.
 Ek adua taa mocas kay amaaw l’awak ki:	 One day the fox said to the owner of the field:
 “Tay c’hetruna ati ghum cariu-day shara.	" “It will enter your field and eat the wheat, the markhor."
"” Shara ghum cariu-day, tay c’hetruna ati."	"”“The markhor will eat your wheat, when entering your field."
"” “Tu nashay-o, idrõ’ may hatya thaway, a zhum,” aghõaw."	"” “When you have killed it, store the intestines for me, I'll eat them,” the fox said."
" Toa se jal abhonaw, tara c’hetruna, se moc."	" Then he sat up a trap, there on the field, that man."
 Tromish-o shara tara ita jaluna as’at’aw.	 In the evening the markhor came there and got caught in the trap.
 Jaluna as’at’aw haw l’awak zhe ka’ga’-o tara dhentak?’una bas pay aan.	" When the markhor was caught in the trap, the fox and the crow went to spend the night in the mountain cave."
 Bas pay-o ka’ga’ tasa kay amaaw:	" After they have gone to sleep, the crow said to him (the fox):"
" “Hey, se ek yardust-o ne aaw, se ek yardust-o ne aaw."	" “Hey! the one friend, the markhor, is not here, the one friend is not here."
"” “To asta jiek, pre,” ghõi amaaw-e, “Tromish hawaw-la, aaw shal’ai,” ghõi amaaw."	"” As the crow said: “Let’s go look for him,” the fox said: “It has become very late, let it be!."
" Copamino rages’t’i: “Se ek malgiri ne aaw,” ghõi."	"” Then early in the morning, “The one friend is not here,” said the crow."
" Pay to asta gri pay jagel-day, ka’ga’."	" He looks together with the fox, the crow."
 Tara pay jiaw jaluna s’at’iaw.	" Having gone there, the crow saw the markhor caught in the trap."
 Toa ka’ga’ l’awakas kay amaaw ki:	 Then the crow said to the fox:
" “Tay dando’yak tsil’aka, a ne bhaam …."	" “Your teeth are very sharp, I cannot, …."
"” “Tu al’a jalaw el’i sutr chini, ia khalas hiu malgiri, phato parik-a,” ghõi amaaw, sher amaaw."	"” “You shall break these strings of the trap, and he will be free, the friend, then we shall go,” he said, the crow said."
 L’awak amaaw:	 The fox said:
" “nnn, may dando’yak trupal-day a ne bhaam,” ghõi amaaw."	" “No, my teeth are hurting, I cannot,” he said."
" Batmashi kariu-day, ne, l’awak-o, hah! "	" He is making trouble, right, the fox, right! "
" “May dando’yak trupan-day,” ghõi Desha pay apaw praw."	" “My teeth are hurting,” saying this, the fox stepped aside and stayed there."
 Toa se ka’ga’ sharaas kay amaaw:	 Then the crow said to the markhor:
" “Tu nashikos’ kay apaw-day, h?k asta mo kay."	" “You stay here dying, don’t say anything."
"” “Moc ita tay bic’haraw pe haw, bic’hari al’ay pe nihaw haw, toa a kia cal kaam."	"” “When the man has come and untied you, untying you, when he has taken you out there, then I will find a solution."
"” “Phato pal’aas,” ghõi amaaw ."	"” “Then run away,” the crow said."
" Toa se moc aw, cilim z’ingaiman."	" Then the owner of field came, smoking a chillum."
" Cilim z’ingaiman tara ita, cilim diga’thara thay-o, uchundi tara ita to bic’haraw-mi-e ."	" As he came there, smoking a chillum, putting the chillum on a wall, and going down, having come there, he let the markhor loose."
" Se ka’ga’-o pai to cilim tyay udzakaw to tamaku udzakaw, udzakaw hawaw."	" Then that crow went there, hitting the chillum he spilled out the tobacco, he spilled it out."
 Se moc tes thi adyay paraw tasa ka’ga’as gehen “ay ai” kariman.	" The man went quickly to stop that the crow, saying ‘ai ai’to that crow."
 Ka’ga’as gehen paraw haw shara-o pal’ay paraw.	"”When he went towards the crow, the markhor escaped."
" Phato pal’ay paraw haw, badok phirikay pa’u tasa sharaas."	" Then the markhor is escaping, the man by throwing an axe, is trying to hit that markhor."
" Sharaas ne gri pay, l’awakas d’hãkuna tyay, l’awakas d’hãk-o ac’his."	" But as the axe did not catch the markhor, as the axe hitting the fox’s back, only the fox’s back broke."
 Phato ka’ga’ tasa kay amaaw:	 Then the crow then said to the fox:
" “Tu muziri kariman ai.” “Khoday tay sh?h? araw, “homa-o ne shehe kaw,” ghõi."	 “You were doing bad things to the markhor.
 Phato te paron.	"” “God did this to you, he will not do this to us,” he said, Then crow and markhor left."
" Phato ac’o’?k-o khul hawaw, a asta phato."	" Then the story has ended, and I also, then."
"Kaymina, kaymina, ek baca asta, tasa put ne ubujuna."	"Once upon a time, there was a king, he had no sons."
" Put ne ubuji, se akhabir hikas hul’a."	" Having no sons born, he was becoming old."
" Ego tasa hãsh asta, se asta ku’ak ne kada."	" He also had one horse, it also did not have offspring."
" Toa ek phaker tara, ek faker tara al’a."	" Then a faker came there, a faker came there."
" Tara ita, baca tasa kay mail’a:"	" Having come there, the king said to him:"
" “A akhabir hawis, may azheli ne ubujon,” ghõi mail’a, shehe mail’a."	" “I have become old, to me no children are born,” he said, he, the king, said so."
 Se du pal’aw chal’ay taa dita.	 The faker took two apples and gave them to the king.
 “Ek pal’aw-ta tu zhe tay jaaw kokhon’d’a kay zhua.	" “One apple you and your wife should eat, breaking it into two halves."
” Ek pal’aw-o tay hãshas de se ku’ak kaw.	"” “One apple you shall give to the horse, it’ll give offspring."
 Se tay jaaw du put haliu.	"” “She, your wife will give birth to two sons."
" Du putr pe halaw haw, hawel’o, gad’ara putr-ta, may, se tshatak putraw tay,” ghõi may aaw tasa kay, se faker."	"” “When two sons have been born, the first, eldest son is mine, the small son yours,” he said to him, that faker."
" Shehe may aaw, faker, gal’a tal’ey."	" He said this, the faker, and he went away from there."
" Dura pay apaw-day aaw, kimon no mastruk hawaw kia haw."	" The king went home and stayed there some nine months, or so."
 Se put haliaw.	 The king’s wife gave birth to a son.
 Put hali-mi te shehe araw ki:	" Having given birth to the sons, the king and his wife did so:"
" Tasi hatya ek band kamra sawzaaw, duniaas ne pashay, phawno’una kay."	" For the sons the king made a locked room underground, so as they could not be shown to the world."
 Te tal’ay kimon wat aini.	 They were there for a long time.
" Te gad’a hawan, juhan thi aan."	" They became older, they have become youngsters."
 Te sukuluna sabak maan-day.	 They are studying in school.
" Tasi t’em pura hawaw, te juhan hawan, ne Faker aw, tara."	" When their time had come, when they had become youngsters, right, the faker came, there."
 Tara ita bacaas kay amaaw ki:	" Having come there, he said to the king:"
 “Ajo may put hali nim-dai.	" “Now bring my son, I’m taking him with me."
"” Shehe amaaw-e tasa kay, paraw tal’ey."	"” As the faker said this to the king, the king walked away from there."
" Tara pay to gad’ara putras ne haliaw, ek chutyak putras haliaw."	" Having gone back there, he did not bring the older son, the younger son he brought."
" Tara hali to tasa pashaaw-e, se faker amaaw ki:"	" Having brought him there, and as the king showed him to the faker, the faker said:"
" “Ia may put ne, may put ti?ak bad’ul’a."	" “This is not my son, my son is a little thicker."
"” “Se bo shishoyak, to hali,” ghõi tasa kay amaaw."	"” “He is very handsome, bring him!,” the faker said to the king."
" Shehe amaal-e gheri paraw, tal’ay pay to hardi ne araw se bo shishoyak."	" Being so said, the king left again, and having gone there, he felt sad, because the older son was very beautiful."
 Gheri paraw gheri shato-mi suda aniaw.	" He went there, to the faker, again, again he brought the very same child."
" “Tu may som dukha mo kari, may put aya hali, a parim-dai,” aghõaw."	" “Don’t fool me, bring my son here, I’m going,” he said."
" Phato paraw baca tara pay, tasa kay amaaw-e, se rahi hawaw."	" Then he left, the king, having gone there, and as he spoke to the son, the son became ready to go with the faker."
" Se ego hãsh tan som agriaw, ego khangar agriaw."	 He took both a horse and a sword with him and then went with the faker.
 Khangar agriaw bayas kay amaaw ki:	" He took a sword, and said to his younger brother:"
" “Tay khangaruna pe nanga l’ui akasaw tu may khoci i,” ghõi may aaw."	" “When in case blood appears on your sword, come looking for me."
 Se paraw tal’ey.	” And he went from there.
" Toa dadasi zhe tay som khodayar kay, faker aniaw, to."	" Having said goodbye to the son’s family, the faker took him away."
 Faker ni tasa jaygauna aniaw.	" The faker taking him away, he took him to his place."
" Taa jaygauna ni, tara shial’a ek-ta mac’hiuts shial’a, ego preconawts shial’a "	" Taking him to his place, there was a honey-spring, and, a precona-spring was also there."
 Faker tasa kay amaaw ki:	 The faker said to him:
" “May put shemi zhu, zhuiman apaw de."	" “My son, eat this, stay here eating this."
"” “A shonja-mi thesu shaya pay mutra kay-o pishtyak a im,” ghõi may aaw, faker, paraw."	"” “I must go right now somewhere right near here, having been to the bathroom, I come back,” he said, the faker, and went away."
 Tasa shial’a sat kamra.	 Seven rooms the faker had there.
" Te ac’uyak tasa-day aaw, "	 The faker gave the older son the keys to the rooms.
" day-o, may aaw ki:"	" Having given him the keys, he said:"
" “Ek kamra-o mo umray, tagar el’i-o jagay,” ghõi amaaw."	" “Don’t open one specific room, whereas you can look in the other rooms,” he said."
 Se tal’ay l’abe’ thi tara pay ger ne kay ek awata umraaw-e:	" As the son was playing around at that place, and while going there to the rooms and having forgot about the faker’s orders, he opened up a room:"
 Ek gad’a istrizha tara aaw.	 There is an old woman there.
" Se bo kamzor thi aaw, gad’a istrizha."	" She had become very weak, the old woman."
 Toa se tasa kay amaaw ki:	 Then she said to him:
" “Ey, tu kawel’a payda hawi?” aghõ-la."	" “Hey, where did you come from?,” she said."
 Se taa kay amaaw ki:	 He told to her:
" “May gad’a moc haliaw, may dada."	" “The old man brought me, my father."
 “Dõyõ onja-ta pari.	" “Then, now go."
” “Tay dadaaw ikas t’em thi shiu.	” “The time of your father’s (:
” “Copo tay dadaaw:	 the faker's) coming back has come.
" “gheri shonja-mi im,” ghõi-o pariu."	"” “Tomorrow when your father again will be saying “I’ll come very soon,” he’ll go."
 “Se al’ay pay ponj basano iu.	"” “Having gone somewhere, he’ll come back after five days."
"” “Toa may tada rages’t’i i, a tay kay mon dem,” ghõi amaaw taa kay, sudaas kay."	"” “Then come early to me, I’ll tell you something,” she said to him, to the child."
 May-o pishtyak paraw.	" As she has said this, he went back."
 Se tara paraw-e dadas aw.	" As he went there to his room, his father (:"
 Dadas tara ita:	 the faker) came.
" “Kh?, may put, bad’ul’a hawie?” ghõi amaaw."	" His father having come there, and as he said:"
" “Dada, a sak bad’ul’a thi aam."	" “Father, I have become very big and strong."
"” “Khali precona ric’im-day, sak bad’ul’a thi aam."	"” “I’m only shitting precona, I have become very big and strong."
” Se bo khoshan hawaw.	” He the faker became very happy.
 Gad’a moc khoshan thi amaaw ki:	 The old man being happy said:
 “A dic-ta al’ay pay malal hul’a him.	" “When I went there previously, I realised that I was late."
"” “Onjo shonja-mi atra pay-o, gheri pishtyak a im."	"” “Now I must go there, I’ll be back soon."
” May-o gheri paraw.	"” Saying so, he went away again."
" Toa sudayak phato adyays juan tara paraw-e, gad’a istrizha tal’ay aaw."	" Then, as the child, being young, ran there to the old woman’s room, the old woman was there."
" “Tu shal’a ek kamra asta umray,” aghõaw."	" “You should also open that one room too,” she said."
 “Ne umray aam.	" “I haven’t opened it yet,” the boy said."
"” “Te zhui te s’is’-o oni atra ek kamrauna, te saw darzen kay aaw."	"” “The house has become full, but one piece is needed there to fill the room."
"” “Dura puyrak thi shiu, ek dana phatuki shiu tara."	"” “When he has eaten you also, it’ll be completed."
” “Tay asta pe ashaw haw pura hiu-day.	"” “Then it happened like this there, as he brought me there, I didn’t eat them."
"” “To atra shehe ki aaw, may atra halaw-e, a te ne ashis."	"” “As I didn’t eat, I became weak."
"” “Ne ashis haw, a kamzor hawis."	"” “Then he did not eat me, having brought me here, putting me in my room, he locked me in."
"” “Phato may ne zhui-o, aya hali, may kamraay-day band kay thay aaw."	"” “Whatever I find of different kinds of birds, I’m eating it, as I’m here,” she said."
" “Se tay dadaaw iu haw pe haw, tara ghona cidin shiu, sat k?an cidin, to tara thel."	"” “Having put it in on the fireplace, he’ll light a fire."
” “Angara thayo angar tyel.	"” “Having lit the fire, and having filled it there with precona, he’ll boil it."
” “Angar tyay precona tara puirak kay wis’el.	"” “Having boiled it, he’ll say to you:"
” “Wis’ay-o tay kay maaw ki:	" “My son, stand up, dance,” he will say."
" “May put, us’t’i, nat’ kari”“ ghõi amaaw."	"” “When he has said this, you say:"
" “Shehe pe amaaw haw, tu maas ki:"	" “Father, how do I know how to dance."
" “Dada, a kia jonim nat’ik."	” “I appeared to the world only short time ago.
” “A thesu duniauna paida thi.	” “My father brought me up in a locked room.
” “May dada may band kamraay hal’ay aaw.	” “I even don’t know any people at all.
" “A moc-mi ne jonim” “Onjo aya ita aam, a tay sargayro a kas ne jonim."	"” “Now I have come here, and except for you I don’t know anyone."
"” “Tu us’t’i nati, tay tada kay pashi-o a asta jhoni nat’ kaam”,” ghõi amaaw, se."	"” “You stand up and dance, and from watching you, I’ll also know how to dance,” she said, she."
" “Amaaw pe haw, faker us’t’i nat’iu."	" “When you have said so, the faker’ll then stand up and dance."
"” “Anat’aw pe haw, to t’uki angara histi."	"” “When he has danced, push him and throw him into the pot."
” “Tal’ay precona mocay to histi cidinay.	"” “Throw him into there, into the middle of the precona, in the pot."
” “Ahisti pe haw se abayo del:	"” “When you’ll have thrown him, he’ll cry, “oh-ho,” “I’ll not eat you, pull me out."
" “A tay ne zhum, may chal’ay” ghõi."	” “Don’t pull him out.” 
”To mo chal’ay.	"“When he has boilt well, then pull him out, grind his bones, and bring them here."
"” “Se prus’t thi pe awis’aw, to chal’ay tasa at’hi dr?ki aya oni."	” “There where the heads of the children are.
” “Shal’ay sudayakan s’is’ shian.	"” “When the bone powder have been thrown in there, they’ll all stand up,” she said."
"” “Al’ay kay tyay el’i saw us’t’in,” ghõi amaaw."	" Having taught him these words, she sent him away from there."
 Mon banday-o to ahut’aw tal’ey.	" He went away to his own place, having gone there, and sat down there, his father came, the faker came."
" Se paraw tara pay nisi ays-ta, dadas aw, faker ao."	" Having come there, the faker said to him:"
 Faker tara ita tasa kay amaaw ki:	" “My son, how fat have you become?” “Yes father, I have become very big and strong,” he told him."
" “May put tu kh? bad’ul’a hawi?” “Ãã dada, sak bad’ul’a thi aam,” ghõi amaaw tasa kay."	 Then the old man suddenly made a fire.
 Phato gad’a moc bedarman angar araw.	" Having made a fire, he put a pot there."
 Angar kay tara cidin athaaw.	" Having put the pot there, he filled it, putting precona there."
 Cidin thay precona praw tara puirak kay.	" Having put it there, he boilt it, having boilt it, he said:"
" Day-o to wis’aaw wis’ay, us’t’i may put nat’ kari, mic-o t’em pas ne hiu."	" “Get up, my son, dance, otherwise time will not pass."
" “Us’t’i nat’ik,” ghõi amaaw-e, se amaaw: “Dada a kia jonim nat’ karik?” "	"” As he said, “get up and dance,” the boy said: “Father, what do I know about how to dance?” "
" “A moc-mi wats kay ne jhonim, kawa pashi-mi ne aam."	"“I don’t know people so well, I haven’t seen any anywhere."
"” “Tu nat’i tay tada kay pashi-o toa nat’im”, aghõal‘-e, toa se us’t’aw."	"” As he said: “You dance, watching you, then I’ll dance,” then the faker stood up."
" Toa to l’as’ t’uki tal’ay ahistaw, abayo praw ki: A nashim-day may chal’ay."	" Then the boy quickly pushed him, threw him into the pot, he yelled “Oh-ho, I’m dying, pull me out."
 Cidinay ahistaw toa se prus’t’ awis’aw.	"” He threw him into the pot, then he boilt well."
 Tal’ay wis’i te mos tana hawan.	" Having been boilt there, the meat separated from the bones."
 Tana thi at’hi niweron toa chal’ay tara oni batthara kay adr?kaw.	" Being separated, the bones were separated, then having pulled them out, he brought them there, and he grinded them on a stone."
 Dr?ki tara hay tal’ay kay udzaki praw-e te himiti us’t’on.	" Being grinded and brought there, and as he threw them there, they all stood up."
" Te pura tre caw bishi juanan, muray istrizha."	 They were about sixty to eighty young men and young women.
 Te us’t’i amaan ki:	" Having stood up, they talked."
" “hic kia kesmat ne, khodayas nomuna para,” ghõi amaaw, tasi kay."	" “No service at all, go in God’s name,” he said to them."
 Te-ta paron tan duray hatya.	 They then went to their own houses.
" Shase band kamraay ays shase gad’a istrizha, gheri nokdar murayak hawaw."	" That old woman who was in the locked room, became young again."
 Murayak thi amaaw ki: “Tu kaway paris-day may ja kari.” 	" Having become young, she said: “Where are you going?, marry me!” "
 “A adhek caker kay-o im” 	"” “But I’ll come back, having gone travelling a bit."
 Tan hãsh asta gri paraw.	” He went away on his horse.
" Ek awata paraw-e,ek jaygauna sonukuras mõ’ shiu."	" As he came to a place, in that one place there was a falcon’s nest."
 Se har kal’a ku’ak kariu hul’a-e.	 It was giving birth to offsprings every year.
 Tara no’una samandar shiu hul’a.	" There below, under the nest, there was an ocean."
 Tal’ey nong dras’ni toa zhu hula ku’akasi.	 From there a monster would appear and then eat its kids.
 Toa te sunukuras ku?akasi saw troin-day:	" Then, the kids of the falcon are all weeping, "
" “Har kal’a homa aya ku’ak kariu-day, shal’ey nong dras’ni homa zhu-day,” aghõ."	" “Every year our mother is giving birth to offsprings, but from there, the ocean, the monster appears and is eating us,” they said."
" “Gam mo kara, a to nashem."	" “Don’t worry, I’ll kill it."
"” Ghõi tara nisaw, nisaw-e pay, shase nong tal’el’a dras’naw, bo gad’a."	"” Saying this, he stayed there, and as he stayed there, the dragon appeared from there, very big."
" Dras’ni tasi neji zhal’iu-e, se to khangar gri tyay to nashaaw."	" As it had appeared, and not yet arrived for them the, offsprings, the boy killed it hitting it with a sword."
 Nashaaw-e te khalas hawan.	" As he killed it, they became free."
" Toa sunukur ao, tasi hatya kia asta oniu."	" Then the falcon came, it was bringing them food."
" Ayas aw, tara ita amaaw:"	" Their mother (:the falcon) came, having come there, the falcon said:"
" “Atra moc aaw, a zhum-day al’a,” ghõi aaw, deshay thi."	" “There is a man, I’m going to eat him,” it said from very far away ."
 “Te amaan ki:	 They said:
" “aya, tu mo zhu."	" “Mother, don’t eat him."
” “Ogal’a kay samandar jagay har kal’a jiay.	"” “Look at the ocean below, every year, look."
” “Tu ku’ak kaas-day-e te nong zhu-day onjo to nashaaw “.	"” “When you are giving birth to offsprings, the monster who is eating them, is killed."
" Ghõi amaan-e, se bo koshan hawaw."	"” As they said this, the falcon became very happy."
 Koshan thi tara ita amaaw ki:	" Being happy, coming there, it said:"
" “Ey, kia kesmat” aghõaw-la."	" “Hey, what service can I do for you,” it said."
" “Hic kia kesmat ne, a mic caker ita ays."	" “No service at all, I have only come by while travelling around”, the boy said."
"” “Parim-day caker parim-day,” aghõ-le Ek ku’ak tasa day-o amaaw ki:"	" “I’m going, I’m going for travelling,” he said."
 “May ku’ak tay hatya kia kesmat kariu.	" Giving him one son, the falcon said:"
"” To asta gri paraw, se."	 “My child will do whatever service for you.
" Pay ek awata paraw-e, sher aaw sher mut’una s’at’i aaw."	"” Then the boy left with the child of the falcon, he."
 Tara s’at’i khuruna tasa mas gri shiu.	" Going, as he came to a place, a lion was there, caught by a fallen tree."
" Mas gri mut’una s’at’i asta, se kasik ne bhaaw."	" Being caught there, its leg was attached to the tree."
 Taa du ku’ak aan.	" Being attached, caught to the tree, it cannot move."
 Te adrakay pay tasa hatya ki asta gri oni tasa den-day Se zhuiman tara aaw hul’a.	" The lion has two offsprings, they were going to the wild forest for him, bringing food and giving it to him."
 Se tasa kay khondiaw ki:	" He was eating it, because he was stuck there."
" “Ey juhan,” aghõaw ki:"	 The lion called the boy:
 “May shandey khalas karik.	" “Hey, young one,” he said, “release me from here."
"” “Kia kesmat haw a tay hatya karim,” aghõaw-la."	"” “Whatever service you need, I’ll do for you,” it said."
 Se taa kay amaaw:	 The boy said to him:
" “Tu may zhus,” aghõaw-le."	" “You’ll eat me,” he said."
" “Ne zhum,” aghõaw, toa se paraw."	" “I’ll not eat you,” it said, and then the boy went there, to the lion."
 Tara pay ek l’undur chini tasa ruaw ahistaw.	" Having gone there, he cut a piece of timber, and threw it in front of the lion."
 Ruaw histi amaaw ki:	" Having put it in front of the lion, he said:"
" “Tay bo pe asa khur trupaaw haw, tu atra don c’hãc’i, mic-o may zhus, tu."	" “When the leg will pain you a lot, you bit the timber there, otherwise you’ll eat me."
” “Daraja hik ne bhaas.	” “You cannot tolerate to be held in that place.
"” “Asa khur atra thi s’at’i shiu,” aghõ."	"” “That leg has grown together with timber,” he said."
 Ek l’undur tara histi to chalaaw.	" Having put another piece of timber in front of the lion, he pulled the lion out."
" Tal’ey chalaaw-e, to l’undur asta brundi khulaaw, se sher."	" As he pulled the lion out, he broke the timber by biting it, that lion."
 Toa du ku’akasi on.	 Then its two offsprings appeared.
" Tara ita, “zhuk-day,” ghõian."	" Having come there, “We are going to eat him,” they say."
 “Mo zhua.	 “Don’t eat.
"” Ay may shehe kay dariman aili, bo gudas himan aili onja, andey khalas hawis,” aghõaaw-e, te bo koshan hawan."	"” As the lion said: “You were looking after me like that, you were having much trouble, now I’m free from here,” they became very happy."
 Ek ku’akaso se taa praw.	 The lion gave one off-spring to the boy.
" “Ia tay hatya kia kesmat kaaw,” ghõi."	" “He’ll do whatever service for you,” he said."
 Te asta gri paraw.	 He left with them.
" Kanduri beabanuna paraw, ek shehe ki t’ek jaygauna."	" He went through a lot of wilderness, to such a high place in the mountains."
 Misali ogal’a shatra shahar jhonaaw Shehe hutala jagayuna se aaw.	" For example, a city there below appeared to him."
" Se tara-mi nisaw, tara bhangut-day nisi."	 In such a high place he was.
" Se tara-mi nisaw, tara bhangut-day nisi."	" He sat right there, hiding there."
 Se zãgu us’i-o zãgu hiu-day hul’a tara.	" He hung up a hammock, and started swinging in it, there."
" Tasa hãsh asta aaw, tara."	 He had a horse too with him there.
" Sher asta aaw, sunukur aaw."	" The lion was also there, and the falcon was there."
 Ek bacaas tre chu asta.	 A king had three daughters.
 Te ja ne-day asta.	 He had not given them away in marriage.
" Adua-ta tal’ay se kasi hul’a, rat-o tromish-o tara ita basiu hul’a."	" During the day he, the elder brother (:"
" Ek adua tal’ey paraw-e, bacaas chul’asi ja denday."	" the hero of the story) was walking around there at his hiding place, at night, in the evening, he was sleeping there."
 Baca chul’asi kay may aaw ki:	" One day as he left from there, the king’s daughters were getting married."
" “A mimi muc’a gamburi dem, el’i gamburi gri abi kas tyat haw, shate mimi beru,” ghõi amaaw, tasi kay."	" The king said to his daughters, “I will hand you flowers, whoever you hit with these flowers, they will be your husbands,” the king said to them."
" Shehe may, “Prus’t’,” ghõi chul’asi amaan."	" Saying this, “OK,” his daughters said."
" Se chutyak chul’as al’a zangu hikwew, shato suda pashi asta."	" The youngest daughter, she had seen that boy while he was playing in the hammock and while he was going to the bazar, "
" Se bazaray parikwew-o, ek l’andraos sambi bazaray pariu-day hul’a."	" While he was going to the bazar, wearing the sick-skin clothes."
" Te sambiaw niji thel hul’a, te-o."	" He would wear it, and he would take them off, putting them in place (at his hiding place)."
" Toa himiti ek ghona maydanuna sariaan, Sari, saw mocbi tara sariay baca sariay aaw."	" Then all people gathered in one big ground, gathering, a crowd being gathered there, the king announced to them all:"
" “May chu ja dem,” ghõi, tara-o gamburi tasi mut’s’a-day aaw-e, chul’asi kuro kas kay tyay aan, kura kas bo shishoyak juhanan kay tyay aan."	" “I am going to give my daughter away as a wife,” he said, to whoever there the daughters have hit with those flowers, that he has handed the daughters, to whoever very handsome young man they have hit."
" Se-o shat asa l’handra mocas kay tyay aaw ki: “May beru shasa,” ghõi."	"” She (the younger daughter) hit exactly the skin-diseased man, “That is my husband,” she said."
 Toa baca kahari hawaw ki:	 Then the king became angry:
 “Tu l’handraas kay gamburi gri pa’.	 “You hit a skin-diseased man with the flowers.
"” “A beyizat hawis, a bo ghona moc."	"” “I have been dishonoured, I am big man."
” “Sawin pi shishoyak tu chu ay may.	” “You are the most beautiful of my daughters.
” “Tu bo shum beru ari.	” “You have chosen a very bad husband.
” Toa te shehe araw ki nii ek gakgos’t’ay praw.	"” Then he did this with them, taking them he placed them in a cattlehouse."
 Te du jamol’asi nii angut’iay nisaaw.	 Taking the two other sons-in-law and their wives he placed them in a guesthouse.
 Te tal’ay aini-ta.	 There they were 
 Rat-o tasi maharaman kay amaaw ki:	 Then at night the king said to their servants:
" “Para,” pay kõ’ kara, may jamol’ay kia mashkul hin-day."	" “Go! and while going there, listen to what my sons-in-law are talking about."
"” Te du jamol’asi h?k ne kaan-day tan te mashkul hin-day,” ghõi may aaw."	"” “The two sons-in-law are not saying anything interesting, they are only small-talking,” the servant said."
 Se l’handra-ley amaaw ki:	 “The skin-diseased said:
 “Copamino pe may ishpashur pe homa mruan hutiu.	" “If my father-in-law will send us for hunting tomorrow, then we will go."
" Te du jamol’asi h?k ne kaan-day tan te mashkul hin-day,” ghõi may aaw."	"” “The two sons-in-law are not saying anything important, they are only small-talking,” the servant said."
" Toa “Prus’t’,” aghõaw, se, tasa kay. “Ko ne hutum-day?."	" Then, “OK,” the king said, he, to the servant, “Why am I not sending them away for hunting?."
"” “Hutum, asa l’handra bo mon del,” ghõi "	"” “I will send them hunting, that skin-diseased man talks too much."
" Copamina te ahutaw, is’kar paron, te."	"” In the morning he sent them away, they went hunting, they."
" Se tal’ey paraw ala pay, tan jaygauna pay."	" The man with the sick-skin clothes left from there, going up to his own place."
 To l’andraos niji athaaw.	 He took off the sick-skin clothes and put them in place.
 Toa te saman sambiis.	 Then he dressed himself with his own clothes.
" Sambi-o sunukuras zhe sheras kay amaaw ki al’ay pay du uprahu’yãk gri-o tagar te-o Gonjikaw dhentuna al’ay bihot’ai-o eu,” ghõi amaaw."	" Having dressed himself, he said to the falcon and the lion: “Go there, catch two pheasants, and let the rest cross the Gonjikaw mountain and come back,” he said."
" Se tara l’abe’ hiu-day hul’a, te paron."	" He played there, they went there (for hunting)."
 Tal’ay pay du dana gri onan.	" After having gone there, they brought two pheasants."
" Tara oni te nit’s’uay prus’t’ tayari kay, thay-o, se l’abe’ hiu-day hul’a."	" Having brought them there, while they unfeathered them, they placed them after having them ready, the man with the sick-skin clothes was playing."
" Toa du jamol’asi thamam jaygauna kasi, nasi chal’ay-o."	" Then the other two sons-in-law walked around in the forest, but they looked in vain for pheasants to hunt."
" Tara kay uchundon, tara uchundi-o amaan ki: “Ay bo gudas hawimi."	" They came down there, having come down there (to the man with skin-sick clothes), they said, “We faced a lot of problems."
” “Homa ek l’handra moc gudas araw.	” “A man with sick skin tired us out.
 “A aya safar kay thay aam a mimi dem.	" “I have cleaned some here, I will give (them) to you."
” Ek angus’t’yar tasa som ashis.	” He had a ring.
 To angus’t’yar l’at’s’hia araw l’at’s’hia kay.	" He made that ring red by warming it over a fire, having made it red, he branded some signs on their buttocks."
" Tasi istek daralit’omay t’hapa s’at’aaw, nis’ani."	" Having branded them, having given them signs on the buttocks, he sent them away."
" S’at’ay-o tasi praw, te tasi-dayo te ahutaw."	 Later he left with the insides of the pheasants.
 Pis’t’aw se paraw te shangurbal’u asta gri.	" Having brought the intestines there to where the sons-in-law and their wives were staying, they made stew of them."
" Tara hay te za aran, za kay chul’as to za asta gri dadas hatya paraw."	" Having made stew, the daughter went to her father with that stew."
 Eg-o tal’ay gagrit’s’ ahistaw.	 She threw one piece of cowshit into there.
 Se zhui zhui akhari-o jagaaw-e:	" After eating for a long time, the father finally realised:"
" “Bo dzaw shial’a isa l’handraas jaas dzaw,” ghõi."	" “It was very delicious, the stew of that skin-sick man’s wife was delicious,,” he said."
" Prus’t’ asa gagrit’s’ tasa ashuna hawaw-e, asa gakrit’s’ al’ay histi oni aaw, asa kiaw ghõi."	" As he had eaten that cowshit all up, after having put the cowshit into his mouth, he condemned it."
 Tasa hatya bo khaca mon praw.	 He spoke very angrily to her.
" “Kh? kaam, dada, tu may nii gakgos’t’ay dyay ays."	" “What shall I do, father, you took me and placed me in a cattlehouse."
" “Al’ay kaway pal’i shian,” ghõi se tasa kay amaaw."	"” “Maybe the cowshit has fallen into the stew from somewhere in the cattlehouse,” she said to him."
 Toa ni ek gardokgos’t’ay te praw.	 Then the king took her and placed her in a donkey’s stable.
" Tal’ey tromizh-o gheri ahutaw: “Pari,” kõ’ kari may jamol’ay kia mashkul hin-day ghõi."	" In the evening he sent his servant there again, “Go!,” he said, “listen to what my sons-in-law are talking about."
" “Prus’t’”, ghõi, geri ahutaw, te."	" “OK,” and sent his sons-in-law away again."
" Ahutaw-e, gheri tal’ay paron. "	" As he sent them, they went there again."
 Tal’ay pay shase moc hala pay gheri. Taa sheras zhe sunukuras kay amaaw ki 	" Having gone there, the man with the skin-sick clothes having gone up there again, said to the lion and the falcon:"
" “Al’ay pay du shara grii-o tagar te-o khonjigaw dhentuna al’ay bihot’ay eu,” aghõaw."	" “When you go there and have caught two markhors and sent the rest of them away across the Khonjigaw mountain, then come back here,” he said."
" Shate du jamol’asi gheri tara kay uchundon, bo gudas thi-o, tasi kirmec asta khul thi shian."	" Those two sons-in-law came down there again empty-handed, very tired, and their shoes had became broken."
 Was’was’ thi tara uchundi maan:	" Having become Ragged, going down there, they say:"
" “Shatasa mocas hatya troik-day, abi."	" “We are crying because of that man, we."
" “Aya shian, a mimi dem."	" “The markhors are here, I give them to you."
” Gheri to angus’t’yar l’at’s’hia kay istek t’haralit’omay tay t’hapa s’at’aaw.	” Then again he made the ring burning red and marked signs on them on their buttocks.
 T’hapa s’at’ay gheri tasi praw.	" The marks being attached, again he gave them the caught markhors."
" Toa te asta gri paron, pay zama kai gheri ayran tromizh-o."	" Then they left with them (:the meat from the dead markhors), having left, they made stew, and again they carried it to the king in the evening."
 Toa ni ek chutyak angut’iay te nisaaw.	" Then the king took them and placed them, the daughters and his sons-inlaw, in a small guest room."
 Tal’ai-o gheri huti aaw:	 Again he sent his servant there:
" “Pay kõ’ kari kia maan-day,” ghõi."	" “When you have gone there, listen to what they are saying,” he said."
 Toa se gheri may aaw ki: “Copamino pe homa hãshgal’ karawaaw ghõi amaaw.	" Then again the man with the skin-sick clothes said, “I wonder if he will make us play polo tomorrow,” he said."
" “Prus’t’,” ghõi, se."	" “OK,” said the king."
" “Asa l’handra har chat kia asta maaw-day, karawaam hãshgal’."	" “That skin-sick man is always talking about whatever, I make him play polo."
” Copamino maydanuna sariini.	” In the morning they gathered on a big polo ground.
 Se jaas kay amaaw ki:	 The man with the skin-sick clothes said to his wife:
 “A hala parim al’ay pay may hãsh halim.	" “I will go up to my hiding place, when I have gone there, I will bring my horse."
” “May te samam sambi im”.	” “I will come wearing my own clothes there.
" “Atra ita hawel’o plinas tyeme ita, tay gad’ara babaaw gulina tyel."	"” “Coming back there to the polo ground, as I hit the first poloball it will fall into your elder sister’s lap."
” “Se al’a oni may prelel.	” “Bringing it she will hand it over to me.
” “Tay mochumara babaaw gulina tyel.	"” “When I hit it again, the ball will fall into the younger of your elder sisters’ lap."
"” “Se oni may demday,” ghõi."	"” “Bringing it, she will give it to me,” he said."
 “Gheri-o pe pa’u tay gulina tyel.	" “When I hit the ball again, it will fall into your lap."
” “Tu-o bihot’ay histi.	” “You throw it away.
” Shehe may-o se pay aaw.	"” Saying this, he went away."
 Tara pay te sambii-o.	 Having gone there to his hiding place he dressed in his own clothes.
 Copamina ita aaw.	 He came in the morning.
" Bo moc-bi sari aan tal’ey, bacahiani saw."	" Many people have already gathered, everybody from that kingdom."
" Toa hawel’-o pl’inas tyay aaw-e, tasa gad’ara baba-as gulina tyay shiu."	" Then, as he then hit the ball the first time, it hit into the elder sister’s lap."
 Se tara hay taa prelay aaw.	" Bringing it there, she handed it over to him."
" Te jhonin-o ne-day ki: “Asa homa jamow,” ghõi."	" They did not know that “He is our own brother-in-law, because "
 Se bo shishoyak moc.	 he is a very handsome man.
 Te samam sambi ita aaw.	” The other man is wearing those dresses.
 To hic kura ne jhonin aan ki asa beru ghõi.	 Nobody at all recognized that he was the husband of the youngest daughter of the king.
" Gheri tyay aaw-e, tasa ek babas gulina tyay shiu."	" When he again hit the ball, it was hit into the other sister’s lap."
 Se tara hay tasa prelay aaw.	" Bringing it there, she handed it over to him."
" Te du jamol’asi-o shate t’hapa ki tay s’at’ay aan, shate tasi trupay gal’ karik ne bhaan-day."	" The two brothers-in-law, because of those marks which was burned onto them and giving them pain, they can not play polo."
 Hãshthara nisik ne bhaan-day.	 They cannot sit on the horse.
" Ek gehen hin-day te trupen-day, "	" To whatever side they turn, they have pains."
 ek gehen hiu-day ek gehenaw trupel-lay.	" They turn on one side, and on the other side, it is hurting in both sides."
" Akhari-o tyay aaw-e, taa chutyak babas, se-o bihot’ay histi aaw tasa kay."	" At last, as he hit the ball to the youngest sister, she threw it to him."
" Histi aaw-e, toa joni aan ki-o asa beru hula."	" As she threw the ball, then they knew that he was her husband."
" Toa tasi pi bes’ay aaw, se."	" Then he beat them in the match, he."
 Te-o ek hal’ asta chal’ek ne bhay aan.	 They could not even make one single goal.
 Tal’ay-o bo koshan thi baca te uchundaaw.	" There, being very happy, the king brought them down."
" Tal’ay dura nii, gheri z’eri araw, tasi hatya."	" Having taken them to the house, he made celebrations for them again."
 Z’eri kay teta mic shum kamraay nisaaw.	" Having made celebrations for them, he simply placed them, the two other sons-in-law, in a bad room."
 To-o ni sahi shishoyak angut’iay nisay aan-o.	" He took the other two, his youngest daughter and her husband, and in a very beautiful guest room they were placed."
 “Ia may jamow hul’a.	 “Now this is a true son-in-law of mine.
"” “A ama ne jhoni ays ia hawel’, l’handra ays,” ghõi."	"” “I didn’t know him at first because he was skin-sick,” he said."
 Tal’ay du bas aini ek bas aini.	 They were there for some days.
 Shehe ek pis’t’aw-day ek t’ana kamra shial’a.	" It was like this, to the back of the king’s house there was another room."
 Tal’el’a-day pay ek hinduistrizha asta.	" Having gone from there, there was a hindu-woman."
 Se-o idrõ’ muzhi te bat kariman asta.	 When they were playing fivestones she was turning the losers into stones.
 Se suda pay tara duruna pay aaw-e se jaas may aaw ki:	" The boy was going, as he went to the door, his wife said:"
 “Tu al’ay mo pari.	" “Don’t go there, "
"” “Al’ay pe paraw khatra,” ghõi may aaw-e, se kabul ne kay aaw."	" if you go there, it will be dangerous for you,” as she said that, he did not accept it."
" Tal’ay pay aaw-e, se jaduistrizha taa som jadu geri kay to bat kay aaw."	" As he went there, a women-magician, turned him into a stone, as she was performing magic on him."
" Bat kay aaw-e, jaas phato nisi troi aaw."	" As she made him a stone, the wife of his sat down and cried."
" Toa bayas jagay aaw-e, dadas dura bayas niranguna l’ui khas’i shiu."	" Then as his younger brother who was in his father’s house looked at this brother’s sword, “blood has smeared out."
 Toa se chutyak bayas citi aaw ki: “May baya kh? hawaw haw?.	"” Then the younger brother thought, “My brother, what could have happened to him?."
” Tasa is’kuna ek hãsh asta gri se ita aaw.	” In his love he came on a horse to rescue his elder brother.
 Ita shatara gad’a istrizhaasuna z’al’i aaw.	" Having come there, he arrived at the old woman’s place."
 Se gad’a istrizha to jhoni aaw.	" The old woman, she recognized him, because he looked like his brother."
 “Jhoni may aaw ki:	" Having recognized him, she said:"
" “Ey juhan, tu shonjami im,” ghõi “pay aay."	" “Hey, young man, you went from here, saying “I will come soon."
"” “Tu kawa pai-o a, shã shohon wat malal hawi,” ghõi may aaw."	"” “Where have you been, for such a long time you didn’t come,” she said."
 Shehe may aaw-e se citi aaw ki:	" As she has said that, he thought, "
" “May baya shaya ita aaw hul’a,” ghõi."	" “My brother has been here,” he thought."
 Se tal’ey nasen dras’ni phato pay aaw.	" He passed by her, then he left (not paying attention, to the old woman any longer)."
 Sunukur-as tada zhal’i aaw.	 He came to the falcon.
 Sunukur may aaw ki:	 The falcon said:
" “Ey juan, may ku’ak tay hatya kia kesmat ne araw-e."	" “Hey young man, didn’t my offspring do a service for you,” it said."
"” “Ne,” ghõi may aaw."	" “No,” he said."
 Ek ku’ak gheri taa-day aaw.	 Again it gave an offspring to him.
 To asta gri pay aaw.	 Then he left with it.
" Gheri pay sheras tada zhali aaw-e, sher tasa kay may aaw ki “Ey juan, may ku’ak tay hatya kia kesmat ne araw?.” “Ne araw."	" As he again came to the lion, the lion said to him, “Hey, young man!, didn’t my offspring do a service for you?” “No, it didn’t,” the young man said."
” Eg-o gheri se-day aaw.	 Also the lion gave him one more again.
" Te asta gri pay shatara zangu hiu-day, shatara jaygauna us’t’i te jhoni aaw ki:"	" Having gone there with the animal offsprings, to that place where his elder brother was lying in the hammock, getting up there, he knew that:"
" “May baya shaya ita aaw,” ghõi."	 “My brother has been here.
 Tal’ey pay aaw se pay shaharay pay sida pay taa jaas dura ati aaw.	"” Going from there, leaving, leaving straight for the town, he entered his brother’s wife’s house."
" Jaas dura ati aaw-e, jaas shatra to jagay bhalauna pali aaw."	" As he has entered his brother’s wife’s house, the wife there, looking at him, fell into wonder."
" Ne taa kay mon dek bhai, ne-ta kia."	 Not being able to say anything to him at all.
 Toa se mic pakti kay aaw.	 Then she just made rice as usual.
 Pakti kay ruaw thay aaw.	" Having made rice, she placed it before him."
 Thay aaw mocuna khangar histi aaw.	" She placed the rice before him, and he placed the sword in the middle of the rice."
 “Shandey andaihak pe tay baza aaw haw tay nashes.	" “If your hand crosses the line from here, I will kill you."
"” To pakti zhui aan, du gehenaw-day."	” Then they ate rice from two sides.
 To ek shen shial’a.	 Then there was a bed.
" Tal’ay d’ud’i aan-e, mocay khangar histi aaw."	" As they slept there, he threw the sword into the middle of the bed."
" Andey andayhak pe tay pet’ek aaw haw, tay nashem,” amaaw."	" “If your veil crosses this line, I will kill you,” he said."
" Toa se copamino gheri se bata pay aaw, taa duruna hatya."	" Then, in the morning he went away again, to that house of the magical woman."
 Pay aaw-e se may aaw tasa kay:	" As he went there, the sister-in-law said to him:"
" “Tu hawel al’ay pay ay kia has zhui ay?” “Onjo gheri paris-day,” ghõi may aaw, tasa kay."	" “The first time you went there, what did you eat?."
 Toa se citi aaw ki:	"” “Now you are going there again,” she said to him."
 “Oh may baya shanday pay aaw-e.	" Then he thought, “Oh, my brother has been here in this house, with the magic woman."
" Se tal’ey durani al’ey atikwew, atikwew, ek mizok tasa shanday ati aaw bazurai."	"” At the time of entering the house from his own house, a mouse entered into his sleeve."
 Se tara pay jadu geriuna nisi aaw.	" Going there, he stayed with the witchcraft (:the woman-magician)."
 Nisi kibaw kay idrõ’ muzhi aan.	" Staying there, doing whatever, they played fivestones."
" Se istrizha to har karikas kay aaw, se mizok anenaw ut’iki tara tyay to istrizha har kay aaw."	" While the woman was winning, a mouse jumped out from here, from his sleeve, and hit the playing board, and it beat the woman."
" Toa se juan tasa kay amaaw ki: “Shel’i tu tes inisan kari,” ghõi amaaw."	" Then the younger brother said to her,”Quickly, make a good human being,” he said."
 Te bat kay kay shaya puyrak kay aaw hul’a te moc.	" She had made many people into stones, made the house full of stone statues of those people."
 Toa se deras’ik gri shehe kay tyay aal’-e te himiti us’t’i aan.	" Then taking the smaller stones, she threw them onto the statues like this, then they all stood up."
 Tara us’t’i may aan ki:	" Having stood up there, and as they said:"
" “Ey juan, kia kesmat ghõi aan-e."	" “Hey young man, what service can we do for you,” he said:"
" Hic kia kesmat ne, khodayas namuna para."	" “No service at all, in God’s name, go."
” “May bayaa bati a aya ita ays.	"” “I had come here because of my brother,” the young man said."
” Toa tal’ey phato bayas asta thi ita aan.	 Then his brother also being they appeared there.
 Phonday it-o se citi aaw ki:	" On the way, the boy who had just become alive thought to himself:"
 “Ia may jaa dura ita.	 “He came to my wife’s house.
"” “May jaa som bo mashkul thi aaw,” ghõi, bayas nashay aaw, se ek bayas."	" He might have talked a lot with my wife,” saying this to himself, he killed his brother, his younger brother."
 To nashayo se paraw dura hatya.	" Having killed him, he went to his house."
" Dura pay nisi aaw, nisi aaw-e, jaas balauna pal’i aaw."	" He went home, sat down, as he sat down, his wife fell into wonder."
 “Kia maam asa kay.	 “What shall I say to him.
"” Te al’ay parin-day, al’ay pay bat hin onja kh? thi se ao."	"” “They are going there, going there, they are becoming stones, now how can he come back!,” the wife wondered."
 To pakti kay zhui aan.	"Then having made rice, they ate."
 Gheri pakti kay aan e h?k asta ne kay.	" They made rice again, they did not say anything at all."
 Zhui aaw toa tasa kay may aaw ki:	" He ate, then he said:"
 “Osi tay hatya kia wakia thi ashis ?” 	 “What happened to you last night.
" “A osi pakti tay pra, mocay khangar ahisti,” ghõi may aaw."	"” “Last night I served you rice and you put the sword into the middle of the rice, she said."
 Huk ne kay aaw pakti zhui aaw.	" Then he did not say anymore, he just ate rice."
 D’ud’ikwew gheri se may aaw ki: “Osi tay hatya kia wakia hawaw?” 	" At sleeping time, he asked again, “What happened to you last night?."
" “Tu mocay khangar ahisti, “A tay nashem, ghõi,” ghõi amaal-e. Toa se citi aaw ki:"	"” “You put the sword into the middle of the bed, saying “I will kill you if you cross the dividing line indicated by the sword,” as she said this, then he thought:"
 “Oooh may bayaa galti ne shial’a.	" “Oh no!, my brother did not do wrong."
"” “May baya mic nashes, a,” ghõi."	"” “I just killed my brother, I."
" Pishtyak se us’t’i paraw us’t’i tara pay, taa junazasena pai, nashi aaw."	"” Then he stood up and left, having stood up and left for there, he went near to the dead body, where his brother died."
 Se tara pay se troi aaw.	" Having gone there, he wept."
 Troi aaw-e tara ek faker payda hawaw.	" As he wept, a faker appeared there."
"” “Onjo a ita troim-day isa bati, ko nashes, ama,” ghõi."	"” “Now, having come here, I’m crying for him, why did I kill him,” he said."
" “Tu ne nashay aas, isa phal’ik khul aaw ia anashaw, tay mut’s’a thi."	" “You did not kill him, his grain had finished, he simply died, by your hands."
 “Dõyõ tu jonis-day.	 “Now you know it.
"” “May umbur kimon, may kaw kimon shiu?,” aghõaw."	"” “What is my age, how many are my years,” the young man said."
 Se taa kay amaaw ki:	 The faker said to him:
" “Tay dubishizhedash kaw warek shiu,” amaaw."	" “You have 50 more years,” he said."
" “May zhe isa mocuna phazhi, dubishizheponj-o asa de bishizheponj-o may de."	" “Divide them between me and him, give 25 to him, and give 25 to me."
” Se tasa phazhi praw-e se us’t’aaw ch?ki.	"” As the faker divided his remaining years for him, the younger brother got up and sneezed."
" Us’t’aaw-e amaaw ki: “A sak d’ud’i ays may ko bujay?,” bayas amaaw."	" As he stood up, he said, “I slept so well, why did you wake me?,” his brother said."
 Se tasa kay amaaw ki:	 He said to him:
" “Tu d’ud’is-o kia-day, a tay nashay ays."	" “You were not sleeping, I have killed you."
"” “Onjo gheri tay anga aris, may kaw tay som aphazhis."	"” “Now I woke you up again, I divided my years with you."
"” Tal’ey dura paron dura pay, te bo wat tara hin."	"” From there they went to the house, having gone to the house, they were there for a long time."
" Tal’ey-o tan bacahiuna hatya te pishtyak, dadas kay amaaw ki:"	 The older brother again asked his father-in-law if they could go from there to their own kingdom again.
" “Ai parik-day homa aya pashialak hiu-day, homa dada” ghõi amaal-e, baca tasi hatya bo saman tasi praw."	" As they said: “We are going now, we miss our mother and our father,” the king gave them a lot of things."
day te ahutaw sunukur asta gri.	" Having given them this, then he sent them away along with the falcon."
 Te pay shatara jaygauna azhal’an-e se istrizha tasi wal’ thi aaw ja ne thi.	" Having gone, and as they came that place of theirs, the woman waited, had not got married."
 To istrizh-o tasa ek bayas ja praw.	 That woman married with the youngest of the brothers.
 Ja-day tan dura azhal’an-e dadas zhe ayas bo akhabir thi aan.	" Being married, and as they came to their own house, his mother and father had become old."
 Te pashi gheri te murayak hawan.	" Seeing them again, they became young."
 Gheri zheri kay zhunday pin-day nisi aan.	" Again while celebrating, they are eating, drinking, staying there."
 May-o khuta hãsh pron.	 And me they gave a lame horse.
